Are TVs really cheaper than ever? We go back a few decades to see - CNET X Your Guide To a Better Future Add as a preferred source on Google News AI Tech VPN Phones Laptops Audio TV Services & Software Computers All Tech Home Home Security Smart Home Kitchen & Household Yard & Outdoors Home Internet All Home Entertainment Gaming TV & Movies Streaming All Entertainment Wellness Sleep Nutrition Fitness Personal Care All Wellness 100 Days of Holiday Cover Stories More Money CNET Video Editors' Choice All More Add as a preferred source on Google Back Today's Highlights 01 Shop These 70 Early Black Friday Deals Today 02 Heard, Chef. Air Fryers Have Earned Their Place in Our Kitchens 03 iPhone 17 Review: Skip the Rest, This One's All You Need 04 Apple Watch Series 11 vs. Ultra 3 and SE 3 05 Don't Buy a Light Therapy Lamp Without Reading This First 06 Acer Aspire 16 AI: Yes, a 16-Inch Laptop Can Be Ultraportable 07 All I Want for Black Friday Are These 5 Big Deals 08 Best VPN 2025: Top 5 Services Tested 09 Top 100 Channels on Live TV Streaming Services: YouTube TV, Hulu Live and More AI Still Haven't Gotten Into the Viral Sora 2 App? The Key To Getting a Code If You're Using ChatGPT For Any of These 11 Tasks, You Need to Stop How to Detect AI Writing Using These Tips All Gemini Users Can Now Use the Viral Nano Banana AI Image Generator. Here's How Wellness 9 Best Yoga Poses for Your Ultimate Night's Sleep 10 Simple Ways to Protect Your Eye Health Each Day Apple Cider Vinegar: Here's What to Know About Health Benefits, Proper Dosage and More 7 Simple Happiness Hacks to Help You Control Your Mood Back Tech Whatever tech you're after, we'll help you save on it. Explore all Best VPN Deals Best Gifts Under $300 Apple Deals iPad MacBook AirPods iPhone TV & Audio Deals TV Roku Sonos Streaming Gaming Deals Xbox PS5 Nintendo Switch Gaming PCs Back Home Give your home an upgrade or snag some everyday essentials without breaking the bank. Explore all Best Electric Lawn Mower Deals Best Amazon Deals Smart Home Deals Smart Home Home Security Robot Vacuum Smart Thermostat Equipment Deals Portable ACs Generators Electric Lawnmowers Air Purifiers Kitchen Deals Coffee Makers Keurig Air Fryers Back Wellness Focus on you with these health and wellness savings. Explore all Best Mattress Deals Fitness Gifts Fitness Deals & Gifts Fitbit Garmin Meal Delivery Kit Glasses and Contacts Back Gift Guides Discover the perfect gift for every occasion. Explore all 100 Days of Holiday DIY Father's Day Gifts Under $100 Under $50 Hottest Toys Online Flower Delivery Services Gaming Tweens Available on Amazon People Who Already Have It All Gift Baskets Back Cover Stories These deep dives offer unique and expert perspectives on tech and other topics that matter most in our daily lives. Explore all Heard, Chef. Air Fryers Have Earned Their Place in Our Kitchens Wellness Influencers Are Good at Winning Your Trust. That May Not Be the Best Medicine AI Data Centers Are Coming for Your Land, Water and Power No, Your iPhone Isn't Listening to You. Here's What's Really Happening What Makes Cheap Earbuds a Real Value (or Not)? I Dug In to Find Out AI Obituary Pirates Are Exploiting Our Grief. I Tracked One Down to Find Out Why Back Our gifting experts are obsessively searching for holiday gifts that are unique, thoughtful and suitable for any budget. Explore all Best Tech Gifts 27 of the Best Tech Gifts Under $100 for 2025 Best Gifts for Gamers 2025 Best Travel Tech Gifts: Must-Haves for the Journey and the Destination Gifts For Kids Best Toys for Kids in 2025 36 Best Gifts for Teens in 2025 31 Best Advent Calendars for Kids in 2025 Gifts For Everyone 43 Best Christmas Gifts and Ideas for Every Price Range Best Gifts Available on Amazon: From $10 to $250 33 Unique Gifts for People Who Have Everything Back AI Stay up to date on developments in the rapidly evolving world of AI with AI Atlas. Explore all AI News iPhone 16E AI Apple Intelligence Reboot Galaxy S25 AI ChatGPT Image Gen AI Reviews Best AI Image Generators ChatGPT Free vs. Plus Google Gemini Microsoft Copilot Best AI Chatbots Best AI Website Builders ChatGPT vs Gemini AI Guides How to Detect AI What is an LLM AI Resume Writing ChatGPT Glossary Back VPN VPN reviews and guides from our experts to help you boost your online privacy. Explore all Best VPNs Best VPN iPhone Free Amazon Fire Stick Mobile Streaming VPN Deals VPN Reviews ExpressVPN Surfshark NordVPN NordVPN vs. ExpressVPN Back Phones Expert reviews and insightful guides on the latest phones to help you find the perfect device for your needs. Explore all Best Phones Best Overall Phones iPhone Android iPhone Deals Best Phone Plans Family Plans Cellphone Plans Unlimited Plans Phone Reviews Galaxy S25 Ultra iPhone 16 Pro iPhone 16 Cases Back Laptops Guides from our experts to help you find the best laptop for your specific needs. Explore all Best Laptops Best Laptop School Laptop Macbook Windows Battery Life Lightweight Gaming Budget Monitors Laptop Guides Chromebook vs. Laptop MacBook Air vs. MacBook Pro Laptop Deals Back Audio The best of our audio guides to help you make the most of your listening experience. Explore all Best Earbuds Wireless Budget Noise-Canceling Best Headphones Best Overall Headphones Noise Canceling Work from Home Best Speakers Bluetooth Record Players AV Receivers Back TV We'll help you make your entertainment as good as the movies. Explore all Best TVs Best Overall TVs 65-inch 75-inch Budget TV Deals QLED vs. OLED TV Accessories Best Projectors Best TV Antenna TV Streaming Devices Best Streaming Device Best Fire TV Stick Back Services & Software All the news and tips you need to get the most out of services, apps and software you use every day. Explore all Services and Software Best Antivirus Software Best Password Manager Extra 15GB Gmail Storage iOS Tips Settings to Change How to Clear Your Cache Hidden Features Web Hosting Minecraft Server Best Web Hosting Services Best Cheap Web Hosting Back Computers What you need for work and play, and how to get the most out of it. Explore all Best Computers Desktop Computer Gaming PC iMac Deals Best Tablets Best Overall Tablet Best iPad E Ink Tablets iPad Pro Deals Computer Tips Recycle Old Tech Windows on Mac Back Home Security Practical advice on keeping your home safe and secure. Explore all Best Home Security Cameras Best Overall Security Camera Outdoor With No Subscription Wireless Best Security Systems Best Overall Security System DIY Security System Best Security Products Ring Video Doorbell Smoke Detectors Smart Locks Video Doorbells Back Smart Home Everything you need to know to build a smart home that works for you. Explore all Best in Smart Home Indoor Smart Garden HomeKit Smart Thermostats Smart Garage Door Controller Smart Plugs Smart Displays Smart Home Devices Smart Lights Amazon Alexa Smart Home Deals Best Electric Vehicles Best Overall EVs EV Chargers Budget Back Kitchen & Household From coffee makers to robot vacuums, we tackle what you need to know to keep your home running smoothly. Explore all Best in Home Tech Dishwashers Car Vacuums Showerheads Air Purifiers Cordless Vacuums Robot Vacuums Best for Home Office Office Chairs Standing Desks Surge Protectors Tower Fans Dehumidifiers Best in the Kitchen Air Fryers Bread Machines Meat Thermometers Nonstick Pans Back Yard & Outdoors All the tools, gear and skills you need to keep your home's yard and outdoor spaces looking sharp. Explore all Best in Yard & Outdoors Garden Hoses Pressure Washers Water Guns Grills Electric Lawn Mowers Solar Batteries Portable Power Stations Back Home Internet We unpack everything you need to know about internet service. Explore all Internet Reviews Verizon 5G T-Mobile 5G Xfinity Internet AT&T Internet Air Starlink Best ISPs Best Routers Best Overall Routers Gaming Wi-Fi Extenders Mesh Wi-Fi Systems Top ISPs by Location Chicago, IL San Francisco, CA Houston, TX New York, NY Back Gaming Reviews, news and buying advice on console, PC, handheld and VR gaming. Explore all Nintendo Switch 2 How to Buy the Switch 2 Switch 1 vs. Switch 2 Switch Deals Best Games by Platform Nintendo Switch PlayStation 5 Xbox PC Games Mobile Virtual Reality Best Gaming Hardware VR Headsets SSDs for PS5 MicroSD Express Best Gaming Deals PlayStation Plus Xbox Game Pass Free Xbox Game Pass Xbox Deals Back TV & Movies When and where to watch TV shows, movies, and live events on streaming services. Explore all What to Watch Best Shows This Week Best Netflix Shows Best Netflix Movies Best Max Shows Best Max Movies Best Prime Video Shows Best Prime Video Horror Movies Best Prime Video Sci-Fi Movies Best Disney Plus Shows Best Apple TV Sci-Fi Shows Best Hulu Horror Movies Best Peacock Shows Back Streaming News, comparisons and advice to help you make sense of streaming. Explore all Best Streaming Services Best Overall Streaming Services Free Live TV 4K Content Kids Music Streaming Deals Streaming Service Reviews YouTube TV Hulu Plus Live TV Netflix Max Youtube TV vs. Hulu Plus TV Back Sleep Our science-backed advice will help you sleep well every night. Explore all Best Mattresses Best Overall King Firm Memory Foam Twin Adjustable Plus Size Side Sleepers Air Mattresses Mattress Reviews Tempur-Pedic DreamCloud Nectar Beautyrest Helix Purple Mattress Deals Best Sleep Products Cooling Comforters Cooling Mattress Toppers Earplugs for Sleeping Sleep Trackers Travel Pillows Best Pillows Cooling Pillows Sleep Headphones Back Nutrition From plant-based meat to the latest diet trend, we help you eat healthy. Explore all Best Meal Kits Best Overall Meal Kit Meal Delivery Deals Vegan Healthy Meat Delivery Keto Cheapest Nutrition Tips Protein Visual Guide Meal Kits vs. Groceries Natural Sugar Substitutes Apple Cider Vinegar Back Fitness No matter your fitness goals, we've got the expert tips you need. Explore all Best Fitness Equipment Peloton Alternatives Smart Home Gyms Exercise Bikes Treadmills Ellipticals Best Fitness Accessories Smart Scale Massage Guns Heart Rate Monitor Back Personal Care We share how to look and feel so fresh and clean. Explore all Best in Eyewear Replacement Rx Lenses Reading Glasses OTC Eye Drops Vitamins for Healthy Eyes Online Glasses Stores Online Contact Lenses Best in Dental Care Electric Toothbrushes Teeth Whitening Strips Whitening Toothpaste Back Money Get the latest news and share tips for making better decisions for your financial future. Explore all Social Security Social Security Check Tracker Social Security Mistakes How to Maximize Social Security Best Finance Software Identity Theft Protection Tax Software TurboTax Review Free Tax Filing Rocket Money Review Zelle Limits Back CNET Video Your video guide to the ever-changing tech world. Explore all Expert vs. AI: Is Now the Time to Buy an EV? - CNET The Real Reason to Upgrade to iPhone 16E (It's Not AI) - CNET Watch Unitree's G1 Humanoid Robot Run in New Video - CNET iPhone SE 4 vs. iPhone 17 Air Rumors: Does Size Matter Over Cost? - CNET Back Editors' Choice Our Editors' Choice awards represent the very best products and services our expert editors recommend. Explore all Subscription Services Energy Services Giftable Tech Money and Wellness Black Friday Sales Are Here Shop deals curated by our expert deal finders See Our Top Picks Why You Can Trust CNET Our expert, award-winning staff selects the products we cover and rigorously researches and tests our top picks. If you buy through our links, we may get a commission. How we test TVs Tech Home Entertainment TVs Are TVs really cheaper than ever? We go back a few decades to see Beyond the Black Friday deals and disposably cheap TVs, are televisions getting more or less expensive? Let's find out. Geoffrey Morrison Contributor Geoffrey Morrison is a writer/photographer about tech and travel for CNET, The New York Times , and other web and print publications. He's also the Editor-at-Large for Wirecutter. He is the author of Budget Travel for Dummies as well as the bestselling sci-fi novels Undersea , and Undersea Atrophia . He's NIST and ISF trained, and has a degree in Audio Production from Ithaca College. He spends most of the year as a digital nomad, living and working while traveling around the world. You can follow his travels at BaldNomad.com and on his Instagram and YouTube channel . See full bio Geoffrey Morrison Nov. 23, 2017  4:00 a.m. PT 5 min read Geoffrey Morrison It's an old adage that technology gets better and cheaper every year. But how true is that? There are certainly more inexpensive products every year, but often those less-expensive products perform worse than average . They're just cheaper, but not as "good." If you look at the best TVs on the market, they're still pretty expensive. But how does that compare to the best offerings from a few years ago? Most people don't remember what they paid for their last TV, never mind a TV from 20 years ago. For that matter, how much did the best TV cost in 1997? I'm glad you asked. Best Cyber Monday 2017 cheap TV deals (plus our favorite picks) +21 More See all photos LG 2017 baseline LG OLED55B7A: $2,300 Price-per-square-inch: $1.78 To start our comparison, let's use the LG B7A OLED . It's nearly identical to the C7 OLED , our current Best TV pick . The 55-inch has an MSRP of $3,000 for a price-per-inch of about $2.32. However, that's the MSRP. They're currently as low as $1,500 for lack Friday 2017. So in terms of screen area, that's $1.24 per square inch, which is pretty amazing for the TV that has the best performance of the year, and by extension, some of the best performance of a TV ever. This is in today's dollars because, well,   it's today. As we go back in time, I'll use the Bureau of Labor Statistic's inflation calculator and list the prices in today's dollars as well. 2012 (5 years ago) Panasonic TC-P55VT50: $2,680 PPSI: $2.08 Plasma! Ah the good old days. Well, sort of. Plasma TVs were great, but these are still old TVs. Today's OLEDs are brighter, have better color, have higher resolution, and more. 4K was still on the horizon five years ago, but already creating waves . The VT50 series was an amazing television for 2012 , and not ridiculously expensive: $2,500 for a 55-inch. In today's dollars, that's a fairly close $2,680. And price-per-screen-area is pretty close to today's OLED. OLED's MSRP anyway. It's a little misleading, though, because plasmas always had a fantastic price-to-performance ratio. The similarly priced LCDs didn't look as good and weren't as well reviewed. The great LCD of 2012 that did look amazing was the slightly larger Sharp Elite PRO-60X5FD , which retailed for a brutal $6,000 ($3.91 PPSI). Think about that: you can get a 65-inch OLED today that's larger and HDR / WCG for a fraction of the price of that TV. That's progress. 2007 (10 years ago) Sarah Tew/CNET Pioneer Elite Kuro PRO-110FD: $7,046 PPSI: $6.60 The legendary Pioneer Kuro. It is to TVs what the Porsche 959 was to cars: cutting-edge technological brilliance that was too far ahead of its time to last long. Though I assume Pioneer hoped to make Kuros far longer than Porsche planned on making the 959. This TV was a revelation in contrast ratio and picture quality. When I reviewed it, I called it the "best TV ever." When David reviewed the following year's model , he said "The Pioneer Elite PRO-111FD represents the pinnacle of flat-panel HDTV picture quality." It was also expensive. $6,000 then, $7,046 in today's dollars. And get this: that was just for the 50-inch, for a PPSI of $6.60. Ouch. 1997 (20 years ago) Fujitsu Philips/Fujitsu Flat Plasma TV: $22,924 PPSI: $30.45 Sony KV-35XBR48 CRT TV: $3,821 PPSI: $5.83 1997 was the year the first flat-panel TVs really hit the consumer market ( Fujitsu having started plasma production in late 1996 ). This TV was flat. It was the future. It was expensive. It… looked terrible. This was an ugly, ugly TV. CRTs of the era, like this Sony, weren't much smaller, diagonally, and offered significantly better picture quality. For $15,000, it wasn't even HD! 852x480 pixels. Today you can get 3,840x2,160 pixels, plus more color, contrast, brightness, and way more screen, for less than 5 percent of the cost of this TV when new. In comparison, the best TVs of the day were CRTs. Scratch that. The only TVs of the day. Rear-projection TVs were capable of a bigger picture, but for the best image, direct-view CRTs ruled. Sony owned this category for most of the last half of the 20th century. How about a Sony KV-35XBR48 ? $2,500, progressive scan, and despite the name, a massive 37-inch screen. How about them S-video inputs? Plus, it only weighs 200 pounds! There were perhaps better TVs in 1997, but the internet isn't what it is now. 1954 (63 years ago) Earlytelevision.org Westinghouse H840CK15 : $11,875 PPSI: $110.20 (!) Let's go way back, to the earliest days of color television. It all seems like ancient history now, but color TV hit the market only a decade or so after black-and-white TV really started to take off (though Farnsworth himself had been working on TV since the '20s). Much like the early days of HD and 4K, there wasn't much content, so adoption was slow. Prices quickly dropped, however, mostly because people weren't buying. RCA's CT-100 dropped to $495, or $4,440 in today's money ($21.02 PPSI for the 21-inch TV), not long after launch. By the mid-'60s, when color programming really took off, color TVs were even cheaper. You could even get a massive 23-inch screen for $350 ($2,517). And those numbers are even a bit optimistic. The Westinghouse may have had a 15-inch tube, but the viewable area was far less. Earlytelevision.org Bigger, and eventually cheaper It's easy to say that TVs get cheaper every year. And as you can see, to an extent, that's absolutely true. More accurately, though, it's that they get cheaper per inch. From $110-per-square-inch in the 1950s to $1.24-per-inch or even less today. More than cheaper, TVs get bigger. The biggest disruptions come at the lower end of the market, something far harder to track. In the '50s, Westinghouse and RCA were some of the only manufacturers of this new technology. Now there are dozens of companies making TVs. You can get a great TV now for less than $0.50-per-square-inch of screen. That's an old trend, too. As new manufacturing powerhouses come in, they aim for the bottom of the market. They first offer something inexpensive, then later, something inexpensive and good, then eventually something good and expensive. It happened with Japan in the '70s and '80s, it happened with Korea in the '90s and 2000s, and it's happening now with China. But in general, prices drop, so companies create something new that's exciting. In this case that means bigger, better, and because so many parts are similar, cheaper. All this has happened before and will happen again . Got a question for Geoff? First, check out all the other articles he's written on topics like why all HDMI cables are the same , TV resolutions explained , LED LCD vs. OLED and more. Still have a question? Tweet at him @TechWriterGeoff then check out his travel photography on Instagram . He also thinks you should check out his best-selling sci-fi novel and its sequel . CNET TV Coverage TV Types Best TV Best Smart TV Best 4k TV Best Budget TV Best TV for PS5 & Xbox Best Gaming TV Best TV Deals Best 4k TV Deals Best Cheap TV Deals Best OLED TV Deals Best Apple TV Deals TV Sizes Best 75-Inch TV Best 65-Inch TV Best 55-Inch TV Best 43-Inch TV Best 32-Inch TV Streaming & TV Accessories CNET Streaming TV Insider Best Live TV Streaming Service Best Streaming Service Best Free TV Streaming Service Best Music Streaming Service Best Streaming Device Best Fire TV Stick Best Soundbar Best TV Antenna Best AV Receiver Best HDMI Cables Best Universal Remote TV Information How CNET Tests TVs QLED vs OLED HDMI vs Optical TV Resolutions Explained LCD vs OLED How to Connect a VCR to Your New TV Your guide to a better future US France Germany Japan Korea About CNET Software Downloads Press Room Accessibility Newsletters Your Privacy Rights Licensing Privacy Policy Sitemap Terms of Use Careers Do Not Sell My Personal Information Consumer Health Data Privacy Policy Best Products Best VPNs Best VPN for Firestick Best Mobile VPN Best iPhone VPN Best Live TV Streaming Services Best Streaming Devices Best TV Antennas Best Phones Best Cheap Phones Best Camera Phones Best iPhones Best Android Phones Best TVs Best OLED TVs Best Soundbars Best Projectors Best Bluetooth Speakers Best Laptops Best Gaming Laptops Best Chromebooks Best Monitors Best External Hard Drives Best Antivirus Best Password Managers Best Wordpress Hosting Best Web Hosting Best Gaming Keyboards Best Gaming Headsets Best VR Headsets Best Portable Generators Best Electric Vehicle Chargers Best Electric Cars Best Hybrid Cars Best Electric Bikes Best Home Security Systems Best Security Cameras Best Video Doorbells Best Smart Thermostats Best Smart Locks Best Smart Lights Best Robot Vacuums Best Air Purifiers Best Coffee Makers Best Dishwashers Best Lawn Mowers Best Outdoor Security Cameras Best Grills Best High-Yield Savings Accounts Best Mortgage Lenders Best Home Equity Loans Best Tax Software Best Mattresses Best Pillows Best Weighted Blankets Best Sleep Trackers Best White Noise Machines Best Meal Kit Delivery Services Best Protein Powders Best Fitness Trackers Best Standing Desks Best Massage Guns Best Electric Toothbrushes Best Hair Dryers Best Internet Providers Best Mesh WiFi Systems Best WiFi Routers Best Fiber Internet Providers Best Satellite Internet Providers Popular Reviews ExpressVPN Review Surfshark VPN Review NordVPN Review PIA VPN Review ProtonVPN Review Tempurpedic Mattress Review Saatva Classic Mattress Review DreamCloud Mattress Review Helix Mattress Review Stearns & Foster Lux Estate Review Avocado Green Mattress Review Brooklyn Bedding Signature Review Helix Sunset Luxe Review Hostinger Review Blue Apron Review Thistle Meal Delivery Review Hungryroot Review ModifyHealth Review Chase Savings Account Review Verizon 5G Home Internet Review T-Mobile 5G Home Internet Review LG OLED C4 TV Review Hisense U8N TV Review TCL QM6K TV Review Deals VPN Deals Streaming Service Deals Galaxy S24 Deals iPhone Deals T-Mobile Deals Phone Plan Deals Google Pixel Deals TV Deals Cheap TV Deals MacBook Deals Laptop Deals Xbox Game Pass Deals Mattress Deals Apple Watch Deals Top Explainers What Is Teflon Flu? What Is Cellular Internet? What is Apple Cider Vinegar? How to Improve Cell Service? What is 5G? What are Eye Supplements? Medicare 2025? Soundbar vs Speakers? Fun Alexa Commands Nordvpn vs Expressvpn AT&T vs Xfinity OLED vs QLED How to Increase Gmail Storage? Netflix Secret Menu EVs vs Gas Cars? Child Tax Credit? Events Black Friday Cyber Monday Apple WWDC CES Samsung Unpacked Google I/O World Mobile Congress Apple Event ComiCon Gamescom IFA Black Hat/Defcon Popular Series AI Atlas Editor's Choice CNET Voices Science Culture © 2025 CNET, a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved.