The Difference Between Child Abuse and Discipline jD Law (760) 630-2000 Menu Call Now Español Free Consultation Search our Site Home About James N. Dicks Our Firm Awards & Memberships Our Blog Criminal Defense Criminal Defense DUI Drug Crimes Aiding & Abetting Conspiracy Domestic Violence Expungements Federal Crimes Hit & Run Internet Crimes Juvenile Crimes Military Crimes Obstruction of Justice Perjury Pre File Investigations Restraining Order Violation Defense Stalking Sex Crimes Theft Crimes Three Strike Crimes Violent Crimes Warrants White Collar Crimes See All Practice Areas Results Reviews Español Contact Contact Us Vista Office Areas We Serve Camp Pendleton Carlsbad Del Mar Encinitas Escondido Fallbrook North County Oceanside Rancho Santa Fe San Marcos Solana Beach Vista Areas We Serve Your Freedom Is Important To Us Attorney James Dicks: Former Police Detective Now Fighting For You! California Board Certified in Criminal Law Find out the status of your loved one in San Diego County Warrant Lookup Jail Lookup Find out the status of your loved one in San Diego County Warrant Lookup Jail Lookup blog home Criminal Defense California’s Stance on Spanking California’s Stance on Spanking By San Diego Attorney on March 11, 2021 No one ever said raising a child was easy, and parents are often hounded with hundreds of parenting tips from friends, family, and the media. One of the many debates parents hear involves punishment, particularly spanking. From the legal standpoint, here are several sides to what a court will consider a parent’s right to discipline a child and when it crosses into abuse. How Is Abuse Defined in California? Child abuse is defined under California Penal Code 273(d) as “willfully” inflicting “cruel or inhuman corporal punishment” upon a child or injuring a child in such a way that it leads to “a traumatic condition.” Abuse is typically charged against parents who willingly and purposely harm their children, but it can also be charged against other family members, daycare attendants, teachers, and other adults who harm children. These actions must meet the court’s standards of “cruel or inhuman corporal punishment,” which can vary between judges and juries. In general, abuse charges would not apply to accidental injuries, such as a child breaking his arm while playing football with his dad, but accidental injuries can lead to a charge of neglect if the parent does not respond accordingly to the child’s injuries. Is Spanking Legal in California? In California, the punishment must fit the crime. As such, spanking is considered legal if it is justified for the situation and not excessive. Courts will often look at the events leading up to the spanking to determine if it is justified. For example, let’s say a child acts out and her parents try to talk to her, ground her, take away her cell phone, or impose other non-physical punishments. If the child continues to act out and defies her parents, a spanking may be justified. Courts will only step if the spanking goes beyond what is reasonable. If a parent continuously spanks a child with a belt until he is bruised or bleeding, then it can be considered abuse. In these instances, it is important to discuss your case with an experienced lawyer. The prosecution must clearly demonstrate how your actions are abusive, and there are several defenses a lawyer can employ on your behalf. Why You Need a San Diego Criminal Defense Lawyer If you are charged with child abuse , you can be convicted of a felony and sentenced to two, four, or six years in a state prison and/or required to pay a fine of up to $6,000. You may also lose your parental custody rights, be served a criminal protective order, and the California Child Protective Services may step in if both parents are convicted of child abuse. Deportation is a possibility for anyone here illegally, on a visa, or who has a Green Card. Whether these charges are the result of a misunderstanding, accidental injury, or false accusations, you should talk to a San Diego criminal defense lawyer at jD LAW immediately. Our legal team can review your charges in a free case evaluation and develop a strategy to have your charges reduced or dropped. There are many sides to these cases, and you will want to have a board-certified criminal law specialist on your side. Do not hesitate with the future of your family. Call jD LAW at (760) 630-2000 today. Posted in: Criminal Defense More Criminal Defense Articles San Diego Burglary Defense: Different Charges for Residential vs Commercial Break-In What Happens If San Diego Police Keep Questioning You After You Ask to Leave? Receiving Stolen Property in San Diego: Defenses Based on Knowledge and Value Thresholds How the Exclusionary Rule Can Dismiss Your Drug Possession Case in San Diego Are You Facing Conspiracy Charges for Theft or Robbery in San Diego? Here’s What to Know. Don’t Waste Any Time! Call us today for a FREE Consultation (760) 630-2000 Blog Categories About JD Law Personal Injury Car Accidents Slip and Fall Truck Accidents Criminal Defense Domestic Abuse Drug Possession DUI Fraud Cases Illegal Trafficking Sex Crimes Theft Crimes Traffic Stops Violent Crimes Find out the status of your loved one in San Diego County Warrant Lookup Jail Lookup About James N. Dicks Criminal Law Expert - Led by a Board Certified Criminal Law Specialist. Read More About Board Certification 100s of Cases Tried - Since 1990, James Dicks has represented hundreds of clients. Read Bio Client Approved - Read our online testimonials from satisfied jD Law Criminal Defense Attorneys Clients. Yelp Reviews Recent Posts November 16, 2025 San Diego Burglary Defense: Different Charges for  … November 14, 2025 What Happens If San Diego Police Keep Questioning  … November 4, 2025 Receiving Stolen Property in San Diego: Defenses  … Blog Home Don’t Waste Any Time! Time is of the essence when your future is in jeopardy. Contact jD Law Criminal Defense Attorneys today for the aggressive defense you need. * Anti-spam question: jD Law Sitemap Home Blog RSS Contact Us Privacy Policy Blog Sitemap Disclaimer San Diego Criminal Defense Lawyer Disclaimer: The information on this website is for general information purposes only. Nothing on this site should be taken as legal advice for any individual case or situation. This information is not intended to create, and receipt or viewing does not constitute, an attorney-client relationship. Copyright © 2025 jD Law Criminal Defense Attorneys. All Rights Reserved. Serving clients throughout San Diego and North County including: Vista, Fallbrook, Rancho Santa Fe, Carlsbad, Del Mar, Encinitas, Escondido, Oceanside, San Marcos, and Solana Beach. Website Design and Internet Marketing by: SLS Consulting Contact Us jD Law Criminal Defense Attorneys - San Diego Criminal Defense Lawyer 400 South Melrose Drive, Suite 109, Vista, CA 92081 Directions & Map (760) 630-2000 Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube