Everything to know about your baby's umbilical cord | BabyCenter Community Trending Posts Birth Clubs Groups See all in Community Getting Pregnant Ovulation Ovulation Calculator Fertility How To Get Pregnant How To Get Pregnant Fast Ovulation Discharge Implantation Bleeding Ovulation Symptoms Pregnancy Symptoms Am I Pregnant? Pregnancy Tests See all in Getting Pregnant Pregnancy Due Date Calculator Conception Date Calculator Pregnancy Week by Week Pregnant Sex Weight Gain Tracker Signs of Labor Morning Sickness Fetal Weight Chart Fetal Development Pregnancy Discharge Find Out Baby Gender Chinese Gender Predictor See all in Pregnancy Baby Names Baby Name Generator Top Baby Names 2023 Top Baby Names 2024 How to Pick a Baby Name Most Popular Baby Names Baby Names by Letter Gender Neutral Names Boy Names Girl Names Unique Boy Names Unique Girl Names Top baby names by year See all in Baby Names Baby Newborn Baby Development Baby Feeding Guide Newborn Sleep When Babies Roll Over First-Year Baby Costs Calculator Postpartum Health Baby Poop Chart See all in Baby Toddler Average Weight & Height Autism Signs Child Growth Chart Night Terrors Moving from Crib to Bed Toddler Feeding Guide Feeding Potty Training Bathing and Grooming Behavior See all in Toddler Child Height Predictor Potty Training: Boys Potty training: Girls How Much Sleep? (Ages 3+) Ready for Preschool? Tantrums Thumb-Sucking Gross Motor Skills Napping (Ages 2 to 3) See all in Child Health Photos: Rashes & Skin Conditions Symptom Checker Vaccine Scheduler Reducing a Fever Teething Acetaminophen Dosage Chart Constipation in Babies Ear Infection Symptoms Infant CPR Head Lice 101 See all in Health Family Second Pregnancy Daycare Costs Family Finance Stay-At-Home Parents Breastfeeding Positions See all in Family Courses Infant CPR Baby Sleep Training Preparing For Baby Registry My Custom Checklist My Registries Baby Products Amazon Prime Day Best Breast Pump Best Convertible Car Seat Best Infant Car Seat Best Baby Bottle Best Baby Monitor Best Stroller Best Diapers Best Baby Carrier Best Diaper Bag Best Highchair Best Baby Products See all in Baby Products Popular Searches Dilation Why Pregnant Belly Feels Tight Early Signs of Twins Teas During Pregnancy Baby Head Circumference Chart How Many Months Pregnant Am I What is a Rainbow Baby Braxton Hicks Contractions HCG Levels By Week When to Take a Pregnancy Test Am I Pregnant Why is Poop Green Can Pregnant Women Eat Shrimp D & C Insemination Ultrasound PCOS UTI During Pregnancy Vitamin D Drops Best Baby Forumla Postpartum Depression Low Progesterone During Pregnancy Baby Shower Baby Shower Games Community Getting Pregnant Pregnancy Baby Names Baby Toddler Child Health Family Courses Registry Baby Products Pregnancy / Your Baby Everything to know about your baby's umbilical cord Here's everything you need to know about your baby's umbilical cord, including clamping and cutting, cord blood banking, and more. Medically reviewed by Liz Donner, M.D. , pediatric hospitalist Written by Kathleen Scogna | Aug 20, 2025 Photo credit: © Yaroslav Danylchenko / Stocksy United In this article What does the umbilical cord work? What is the umbilical cord attached to? Cutting the umbilical cord When does the umbilical cord fall off? Umbilical cord blood banking Umbilical cord abnormalities It might not look glamorous, but your baby's umbilical cord is pure magic. Starting at just 4 weeks of pregnancy , this rope-like lifeline connects your baby to the placenta . Without it, your baby simply couldn't grow. From how it's cut after birth to why delayed clamping matters, here’s everything you need to know about your baby’s first (and most important) connection to you. Advertisement | page continues below Key Takeaways Your baby's umbilical cord delivers vital nutrients from your body to your baby, and removes the waste your baby produces. The umbilical cord is attached to your placenta on one end and your baby's belly on the other. When the umbilical cord is removed after birth, it leaves behind a stump that will fall off in one to three weeks – leaving behind your baby's belly button! Sometimes, umbilical cord abnormalities arise during pregnancy and delivery. These typically aren't dangerous and resolve on their own, but some can be serious and require immediate treatment. What does the umbilical cord work? The umbilical cord delivers vital nutrients from your body to your baby, and ferries away the waste your baby produces . It has three blood vessels: one vein that carries nutrients and oxygen-rich blood from your circulatory system to your baby, and two arteries that deliver waste and oxygen-depleted blood back to you. Your kidneys process your baby's waste along with yours for disposal, and your lungs replenish the blood with oxygen. Jonathan Dimes for BabyCenter What is the umbilical cord attached to? The umbilical cord is attached to both you and your growing baby – to the placenta on one end and your baby's stomach (which will eventually become the belly button) on the other. Surprisingly thick and tough, the umbilical cord typically grows to about 19 to 23 inches long and 1 inch in diameter. Cutting the umbilical cord Soon after your baby is delivered, it's time to clamp and cut the cord. Your partner or labor support person can cut the cord , if they'd like. Some moms also choose to cut the cord themselves: "I want to cut mine along with my husband," says BabyCenter Community member Doctorbebe. First, your healthcare provider uses two special clamps to close the cord shut and stop blood flow, usually in two places about an inch apart. It takes a bit of effort to cut through the thick, rope-like cord, but not to worry: There aren't any nerves in the cord, so this procedure is painless for your baby (and for you). My husband was able to cut the cord. It was a beautiful experience every time! - BabyCenter Community member JEMc1021 Delayed cord clamping Traditionally, practitioners in the United States cut the baby's umbilical cord almost immediately after birth, but research shows that delayed umbilical cord clamping has health benefits, particularly if your baby is born prematurely . Advertisement | page continues below Waiting to clamp the cord allows the blood in the cord to continue to flow to your baby, lowering the risk of newborn anemia and iron deficiency in infancy. "I was able to have my babies on my chest immediately during delayed cord clamping," says BabyCenter Community member JEMc1021. "My husband was then able to cut the cord. It was a beautiful experience every time!" When does the umbilical cord fall off? Once the cord is cut, a small umbilical cord stump is left behind. This piece of tissue eventually dries up and falls off, typically in one to three weeks. Until it does, you'll need to care for the umbilical cord stump by keeping it clean and dry. "My baby's fell off around hitting two weeks," says BabyCenter Community member Boymom003. "But it still bleeds a little, so we take precautions and keep it clean. But every baby is different – it just takes time to dry out." Of course, your baby will forever carry a small remnant of the time they spent attached to you: their belly button! Advertisement | page continues below You have no control over whether your baby ends up with an innie or an outie . How your baby's belly button looks depends on how the umbilical cord was attached to your baby's belly during pregnancy, and it can change over time as your child grows. Umbilical cord blood banking You might consider banking your baby's cord blood. Cord blood contains stem cells that can grow into different kinds of body cells and have been used to treat certain diseases, including some cancers and blood disorders. For a yearly fee (plus the cost of collecting the cord blood), you can store some of your baby's cord blood in a private bank for future use. Or you can donate your baby's cord blood to a public bank, where it remains available to anyone who needs it and who matches your baby's blood type. " Leading health organizations typically recommend public cord blood banking over private banking," says Liz Donner , M.D., a pediatric hospitalist and member of BabyCenter's Medical Advisory Board . "Private cord blood is relatively underused, lacking in regulatory oversight, expensive for the family, and potentially lower quality (in number and quality of stem cells) than that stored in public cord blood banks. It's important to understand the difference when choosing whether either option is right for your family, and you should never feel pressured to bank cord blood in general." Advertisement | page continues below Keep in mind that you'll need to decide what you want to do well in advance of your baby's birth so that all the necessary arrangements can be made Here's a rundown of everything you need to know about cord blood banking . Umbilical cord abnormalities Some conditions can arise during pregnancy and delivery that affect the umbilical cord. Most of the time, they resolve on their own and don't harm your baby. A few, however, can be serious. "Umbilical cord abnormalities that persist or arise during delivery can pose a life-threatening emergency," Dr. Donner says. "This is why having access to prenatal care and immediate medical intervention upon delivery is so important to me personally." The most common umbilical cord conditions include the following: Advertisement | page continues below Nuchal cord The umbilical cord may be wrapped around the baby's neck during delivery. This condition, called nuchal cord, is not uncommon and happens in 10 to 29% of pregnancies. In most cases, the cord is simply untangled from the baby's neck once the head is out, and delivery proceeds normally. But if the cord is wrapped very tightly, your healthcare provider may need to clamp and cut it before the baby's shoulders are delivered. Umbilical cord compression Umbilical cord compression happens when the cord becomes constricted, cutting off a baby's oxygen supply. The cord may have become knotted or tangled, which can happen if it's unusually long or if the baby's head is pressing on it during delivery. Umbilical cord compression usually can be detected during labor by changes in the baby's heart rate . A technique called amnioinfusion, in which fluid is inserted into the uterus through a thin tube, may help take the pressure off the cord and allow delivery to proceed normally. Umbilical cord prolapse This is a serious delivery complication: A cord prolapse means the umbilical cord comes out of the vagina as the baby's head is delivered, which can cut off blood flow to the baby. An emergency C-section is usually performed in such cases. Advertisement | page continues below Single umbilical artery A very small number of babies have only one umbilical artery instead of two. This condition occurs more often when you're carrying twins or multiples . Having only one umbilical artery can cause problems for the baby's digestive organs, kidneys, and heart. If you're diagnosed with this condition during pregnancy, you'll have special tests to monitor your baby's health along the way. "You will find that with SUA [single umbilical artery], the doctor will request a sonogram every month," says BabyCenter Community member jenragan35, whose baby was diagnosed with the condition. "At least you can see your baby more than others do. It's fun! They'll most likely send you to a specialist, as well." Umbilical cord cysts Umbilical cord cysts are pockets of fluid that form in the cord. One type, called a true cyst, is harmless and often goes away on its own before the baby is born. It's usually discovered during a first-trimester ultrasound . However, cysts that are found later in the pregnancy may indicate a genetic condition or other problem. If this type of cyst is found, your healthcare provider will likely recommend a detailed ultrasound exam and genetic testing . Advertisement | page continues below Velamentous cord insertion Velamentous cord insertion and marginal cord insertion mean that the umbilical cord is attached to the amniotic membrane or the side of the placenta rather than going right into the center of the placenta. This leaves the vessels of the cord more exposed than they would be if they were attached directly into the placenta, where they would be protected by a gel-like substance called Wharton's jelly. Vasa previa In vasa previa , some of the fetal blood vessels are exposed and cross over the cervical opening, instead of being contained in the umbilical cord. When contractions happen, these blood vessels stretch and may rupture, resulting in fetal blood loss and fetal distress. This is a very serious condition and may require prolonged monitoring in the hospital. Was this article helpful? Yes No Newborn umbilical cord care By Karen Miles Augmentation of labor: Why it's used to speed up childbirth By Karen Miles What is a lotus birth, and is it safe? By Karen Miles The top 5 private cord blood banks, reviewed by BabyCenter parents By Scott Adler Track your pregnancy, prep for what's next, and get expert support – all for free Sources BabyCenter's editorial team is committed to providing the most helpful and trustworthy pregnancy and parenting information in the world. When creating and updating content, we rely on credible sources: respected health organizations, professional groups of doctors and other experts, and published studies in peer-reviewed journals. We believe you should always know the source of the information you're seeing. Learn more about our editorial and medical review policies . Liz Donner Opens a new window , M.D., pediatric hospitalist and member of BabyCenter's Medical Advisory Board Opens a new window American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth, Opens a new window 2023. March of Dimes. Umbilical cord conditions Opens a new window , 2016. Cleveland Clinic, Umbilical Cord Opens a new window . October 2024. Marina Basta and Brody J. Lipsett, Anatomy, Abdomen and Pelvis: Umbilical Cord, Opens a new window StatPearls, July 2025. Stanford Medicine, Umbilical Cord Opens a new window . Pediatrics , Cord Blood Banking for Potential Future Transplantation, Opens a new window November 2017. Version History Nov. 14, 2024 Editor: Rebekah Wahlberg Minor updates throughout; new medical review. August 19, 2025 Editor: Marcella Gates Edited to update information and sources. Kathleen Scogna Kathleen Scogna is the senior director of education at the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine and a former freelance medical writer based in Baltimore. Opens a new window Opens a new window Opens a new window Where to go next Newborn umbilical cord care Reviewed by Liz Donner, M.D., pediatric hospitalist Augmentation of labor: Why it's used to speed up childbirth Reviewed by Sally Urang, MS, RN, CNM, midwife What is a lotus birth, and is it safe? Reviewed by Layan Alrahmani, M.D., ob-gyn, MFM The top 5 private cord blood banks, reviewed by BabyCenter parents Reviewed by Frances Verter, Ph.D., cord blood expert The placenta: What it is and how it works Reviewed by Judith Venuti, Ph.D., embryologist How pregnancy changes your pelvis Reviewed by Emily Hu, M.D., FACOG, ob-gyn Considering a home birth Reviewed by Sally Urang, MS, RN, CNM, midwife Do babies eat and poop in the womb? How your baby's digestive system develops Reviewed by Layan Alrahmani, M.D., ob-gyn, MFM Postpartum preeclampsia Reviewed by Cheryl Axelrod, M.D., ob-gyn Your newborn's senses Reviewed by Kelley Yost Abrams, Ph.D., developmental psychologist Want a village? “Voluntell” them to show up Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C, perinatal psychiatrist How to prevent heat stroke and heat exhaustion in children Reviewed by Liz Donner, M.D., pediatric hospitalist My pregnancy week by week 2 weeks pregnant 3 weeks pregnant 4 weeks pregnant 5 weeks pregnant 6 weeks pregnant 7 weeks pregnant 8 weeks pregnant 9 weeks pregnant 10 weeks pregnant 11 weeks pregnant 12 weeks pregnant 13 weeks pregnant 14 weeks pregnant 15 weeks pregnant 16 weeks pregnant 17 weeks pregnant 18 weeks pregnant 19 weeks pregnant 20 weeks pregnant 21 weeks pregnant 22 weeks pregnant 23 weeks pregnant 24 weeks pregnant 25 weeks pregnant 26 weeks pregnant 27 weeks pregnant 28 weeks pregnant 29 weeks pregnant 30 weeks pregnant 31 weeks pregnant 32 weeks pregnant 33 weeks pregnant 34 weeks pregnant 35 weeks pregnant 36 weeks pregnant 37 weeks pregnant 38 weeks pregnant 39 weeks pregnant 40 weeks pregnant 41 weeks pregnant Advertisement Join BabyCenter for free Track your pregnancy, prep for what's next, and get expert-backed support Get the BabyCenter app BabyCenter is your parenting partner. BabyCenter is committed to providing the most helpful and trustworthy pregnancy and parenting information in the world. Our content is doctor approved and evidence based , and our community is moderated, lively, and welcoming. With thousands of award-winning articles and community groups , you can track your pregnancy and baby's growth, get answers to your toughest questions, and connect with moms, dads, and expectant parents just like you. About BabyCenter BabyCenter apps About us Awards Medical Advisory Board Careers Advertise with us Opens a new window Press Center Privacy Policy Terms of Use Accessibility Health Data Privacy Policy Do not sell my personal information Freebies & Deals Popular topics Help Center Contact Us Community Guidelines AdChoices Popular Articles Common pregnancy symptoms Natural birth How much formula babies need Lullaby lyrics Normal hCG levels by pregnancy week When will by baby drop? C-section recovery timeline Different baby cries Brown spotting during pregnancy When does implantation occur? When do babies roll over? What is lightning crotch? How to get pregnant fast Is mucus in baby poop normal? Healthy snacks for pregnancy How much food should babies eat? Why you may have pink discharge during pregnancy How to tell if breastfed baby is getting enough Signs of low milk supply Tools & Resources Due Date Calculator Ovulation Calculator Height Calculator Baby Teeth Chart Chinese Gender Predictor Hospital Bag Checklist Birth Plan Template Baby Growth Chart Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator Pregnancy Week by Week Pregnancy Week by Week Pregnancy Week by Week 2 weeks pregnant 3 weeks pregnant 4 weeks pregnant 5 weeks pregnant 6 weeks pregnant 7 weeks pregnant 8 weeks pregnant 9 weeks pregnant 10 weeks pregnant 11 weeks pregnant 12 weeks pregnant 13 weeks pregnant 14 weeks pregnant 15 weeks pregnant 16 weeks pregnant 17 weeks pregnant 18 weeks pregnant 19 weeks pregnant 20 weeks pregnant 21 weeks pregnant 22 weeks pregnant 23 weeks pregnant 24 weeks pregnant 25 weeks pregnant 26 weeks pregnant 27 weeks pregnant 28 weeks pregnant 29 weeks pregnant 30 weeks pregnant 31 weeks pregnant 32 weeks pregnant 33 weeks pregnant 34 weeks pregnant 35 weeks pregnant 36 weeks pregnant 37 weeks pregnant 38 weeks pregnant 39 weeks pregnant 40 weeks pregnant 41 weeks pregnant Popular Baby Name Lists Baby Name Generator Unique Girl Names Top Baby Names of 2025 Black Baby Names Names for Grandma Old-Fashioned Names Twin Boy Names Cool Boy Names Popular Names Around the World Unique Names Cool Names Biblical Baby Names Black Girl Names Nature Boy Names Korean Girl Names Korean Boy Names Unique Indian Boy Names Unique Indian Girl Names Witch Names Other sites BabyCenter en Español Opens a new window BabyCenter Australia Opens a new window BabyCenter Brazil Opens a new window BabyCenter Canada Opens a new window BabyCenter Germany Opens a new window BabyCentre UK Opens a new window Connect with us Facebook Opens a new window Instagram Opens a new window Pinterest Opens a new window YouTube Opens a new window Twitter Opens a new window © 1997-2025 BabyCenter, LLC, a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved. BabyCenter is designed for educational purposes only. Consult with a medical professional if you have health concerns. Use of this site is subject to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Advertisement