Economic Inequality - Our World in Data Our World in Data Browse by topic Data Insights Resources About Subscribe Donate Gdoc / Admin Economic Inequality By: Joe Hasell , Bertha Rohenkohl , Pablo Arriagada , Esteban Ortiz-Ospina , and Max Roser Cite this work Reuse this work Introduction Data Explorer Research & Writing Charts How are incomes and wealth distributed between people? Both within countries and across the world as a whole? On this page, you can find all our data, visualizations, and writing relating to economic inequality. This evidence shows us that inequality in many countries is very high and, in many cases, has been on the rise. Global economic inequality is vast and compounded by overlapping inequalities in health, education, and many other dimensions. But economic inequality is not rising everywhere. Within many countries, it has fallen or remained stable. And global inequality – after two centuries of increase – is now falling too. The large differences we see across countries and over time are crucial. They show us that high and rising inequality is not inevitable, and that the extent of inequality today is something that we can change. Related topics Poverty Economic Growth Economic Inequality by Gender Explore Data on Economic Inequality About this data This data explorer provides a range of inequality indicators measured according to two different definitions of income obtained from different sources. Data from the World Inequality Database relates to inequality before taxes and benefits. Data from the World Bank relates to either income after taxes and benefits or consumption, depending on the country and year. Further information about the definitions and methods behind this data can be found in the article below, where you can also explore and compare a much broader range of indicators from different sources: OWID Data Collection: Inequality and Poverty Explore a wide range of indicators on inequality and poverty and compare sources. Research & Writing July 06, 2023 How has income inequality within countries evolved over the past century? While the steep rise of inequality in the United States is well-known, long-run data on the incomes of the richest shows countries have followed a variety of trajectories. Joe Hasell July 03, 2023 Income inequality before and after taxes: how much do countries redistribute income? The redistribution of income achieved by governments through taxes and benefits varies hugely. Joe Hasell Income Inequality Over the Long-run December 02, 2013 How has inequality in the United Kingdom changed over the long run? Max Roser December 02, 2013 How unequal were pre-industrial societies? Max Roser July 06, 2023 How has income inequality within countries evolved over the past century? Joe Hasell Global Inequality April 17, 2017 The history of global economic inequality Max Roser August 28, 2019 Global Inequality of Opportunity Max Roser December 09, 2021 Global economic inequality: what matters most for your living conditions is not who you are, but where you are Max Roser How is inequality defined and measured? July 03, 2023 Income inequality before and after taxes: how much do countries redistribute income? Joe Hasell July 06, 2023 OWID Data Collection: Inequality and Poverty Joe Hasell and Pablo Arriagada June 30, 2023 Measuring inequality: what is the Gini coefficient? Joe Hasell Key Charts on Economic Inequality See all charts on this topic Income inequality: Gini coefficient Distribution of income across richer and poorer groups (before tax) WID, area Income inequality: Gini coefficient before and after tax World Bank (via UN SDG) Income share of the richest 1% (before tax) WID Income share of the richest 10% (before tax) WID Threshold income or consumption for each decile World Bank Annual growth of the income or consumption of the poorest 40% Annual growth of the income or consumption of the poorest 40% vs. the total population Distribution of income across richer and poorer groups World Bank Distribution of income across richer and poorer groups (after tax) LIS Distribution of income across richer and poorer groups (before tax) WID, bars Gini coefficient: World Inequality Database vs. World Bank Income inequality vs. GDP per capita Income inequality: Gini coefficient (after tax) Chartbook of Economic Inequality Income inequality: Gini coefficient (after tax) LIS Income inequality: Gini coefficient (before tax) WID Income inequality: Gini coefficient before and after tax LIS, line chart Income inequality: Gini coefficient before and after tax OECD, line chart Income inequality: Gini coefficient before and after tax LIS, scatterplot Income inequality: Gini coefficient before and after tax OECD, scatterplot Income inequality: Gini coefficient before and after tax WID, scatterplot Income inequality: Gini coefficient in Latin America SEDLAC Income inequality: Palma ratio (after tax) LIS Income inequality: Palma ratio (before tax) WID Income or consumption of the poorest 10% World Bank Income or consumption of the poorest 10% vs. GDP per capita Income or consumption of the poorest 10% vs. mean income Income or consumption of the poorest and richest 10% Income or consumption of the richest 10% World Bank Income or consumption share of the richest 10% World Bank Income share of the richest 1% (before tax) WID, with extrapolations Income share of the richest 1% before and after tax WID, scatterplot Income share of the richest 1% vs. Gini coefficient (before tax) WID Income share of the richest 1%: World Inequality Database vs. World Bank Income share of the richest 10% (after tax) LIS Income share of the richest 10% before and after tax LIS, scatterplot Income share of the richest 10% before and after tax WID, scatterplot Income share of the richest 10% vs. Gini coefficient (before tax) WID Mean income or consumption per day Mean income or consumption per day vs. GDP per capita Mean vs. median income or consumption World Bank Median and mean income (after tax) LIS Median income or consumption per day Median income or consumption per day vs. GDP per capita Reduction in income inequality before and after tax OECD Threshold income for each decile (after tax) LIS Threshold income for each decile (before tax) WID Wealth share of the richest 1% WID Wealth share of the richest 10% WID Chart 1 of 49 Cite this work Our articles and data visualizations rely on work from many different people and organizations. When citing this topic page, please also cite the underlying data sources. This topic page can be cited as: Joe Hasell, Bertha Rohenkohl, Pablo Arriagada, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Max Roser (2023) - “Economic Inequality” Published online at OurWorldinData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/economic-inequality' [Online Resource] BibTeX citation @article{owid-economic-inequality,
    author = {Joe Hasell and Bertha Rohenkohl and Pablo Arriagada and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina and Max Roser},
    title = {Economic Inequality},
    journal = {Our World in Data},
    year = {2023},
    note = {https://ourworldindata.org/economic-inequality}
} Reuse this work freely All visualizations, data, and code produced by Our World in Data are completely open access under the Creative Commons BY license . You have the permission to use, distribute, and reproduce these in any medium, provided the source and authors are credited. The data produced by third parties and made available by Our World in Data is subject to the license terms from the original third-party authors. We will always indicate the original source of the data in our documentation, so you should always check the license of any such third-party data before use and redistribution. All of our charts can be embedded in any site. Our World in Data is free and accessible for everyone. Help us do this work by making a donation. Donate now Our World in Data is a project of Global Change Data Lab , a nonprofit based in the UK (Reg. Charity No. 1186433). Our charts, articles, and data are licensed under CC BY , unless stated otherwise. Tools and software we develop are open source under the MIT license . Third-party materials, including some charts and data, are subject to third-party licenses. See our FAQs for more details. Explore Topics Data Insights Resources Latest Articles SDG Tracker Teaching with OWID About About Us Organization Funding Team Jobs FAQs RSS Feeds Research & Writing Data Insights Follow us Privacy policy Legal disclaimer Grapher license