One in three people have had cash payments refused during the pandemic - Which? Skip to main content Search Search Close Close Back Menu Search Search Close Search Suggested searches Buy a gift Log in Join Saved items Black Friday Tech Appliances Home & garden Money Family Health Cars Travel Consumer rights & campaigns Services Search Suggested searches Home News Money Banking One in three people have had cash payments refused during the pandemic By clicking a retailer link you consent to third-party cookies that track your onward journey. This enables W? to receive an affiliate commission if you make a purchase, which supports our mission to be the UK's consumer champion . 19 Jan 2021 One in three people have had cash payments refused during the pandemic Blanket bans on cash by retailers risk excluding the most vulnerable in society MP Matt Patchett One in three people have tried to pay for something in cash and been unable to do so since the first national lockdown, new research from Which? shows. People were most likely to be refused the option of paying in cash when buying groceries, which accounted for 28% of incidents, our survey of 2,004 people in November 2020 found. This was followed by paying for leisure activities such as going to a pub or restaurant (24%) and buying cleaning products (21%). More than three quarters of those who were unable to pay in cash said it an emotional impact on them. Most commonly this was frustration (44%), while 26% said the incident made them anxious and 23% found it to be embarrassing. Be more money savvy free newsletter Get a firmer grip on your finances with the expert tips in our Money newsletter – it's free weekly. First name (required) Last name (required) Email address (required) Postcode (optional) Get the newsletter This newsletter delivers free money-related content, along with other information about Which? Group products and services. Unsubscribe whenever you want. Your data will be processed in accordance with our privacy notice . Millions of people depend on cash Some 13% of respondents, equivalent to seven million people, told us that they regularly use cash and would struggle without it. Another 5% of people said that they depend on cash and would not be able to do the things they need to do without it. This equates to more than two and a half million people. If businesses refuse to take cash, they risk excluding these people, many of whom are among the most vulnerable in society. Some 53% of people said they had replaced some or all of their cash use since the first lockdown. Of these, 46% said that their declining cash use was as a result of shops prohibiting or discouraging it. 'My independence has been taken away' We heard many examples of the harm caused by being unable to pay in cash, including from Lucy* (pictured), from Oxford. Lucy has a chronic illness which left her essentially housebound for almost seven years. In the past year, she has built up her strength and stamina to the point where she can leave the house once a week, but Lucy says that being unable to use cash is making going out at increasingly difficult for her. 'If I had to do it all on card, I'd have to keep track of my spending while I'm out and I don't have the energy to do that. I wouldn't even bother going out - it would make it impossible.' 'It's taken years and years. Now, finally I'm well enough to get out of the house and it's like my independence has been taken away again.' Another concerning example came from James Boswell, from London. James is diabetic and was in urgent need of food after getting stuck in motorway traffic in November, but when he stopped at a service station, the first two restaurants he tried refused to serve him as he only had cash. He was eventually able to pay in cash at KFC. Cash provides 'a degree of control' Linda Blacker in Southampton and Joanne Heuston in Brighton contacted Which? Money after they were unable to pay for their bus fares in cash. Joanne attempted to pay with a £5 note, but the driver said he had no change. Linda was told the same thing when she attempted to pay with a banknote, despite having her foot in a brace as she had a broken ankle. She was on the way to see her GP to get a sick note. Linda says the driver was rude and unsympathetic, telling her she should get a contactless card instead. But for Linda, cash is an important budgeting tool: 'Quite a few years ago I was in a lot of debt. I've used cash ever since because I know exactly where I stand. It's what works for me.' Joanne says cash has helped her to manage the financial hardships of the pandemic. 'I was reduced to furlough payments and my husband, who works as a taxi driver, had no income whatsoever. So the way we managed our finances was that the money we left in the bank account was for bills and we withdrew the rest to live off so we could carefully control how we spent it'. Jane Tully, director of external affairs and partnerships at the Money Advice Trust, the charity that runs National Debtline, said: 'We know that people on lower incomes are more likely to use cash. This can provide a degree of control for some people, particularly if they are on a very tight income, as that way they know where they are with their money week to week.' Are businesses legally obliged to take cash? We think it should be people's prerogative to pay with cash, whatever their reason for doing so. But there is no legal obligation for a business to accept it. It's the business owner's right to decide what payment methods they want to accept. Not everyone is aware of this, with confusion stemming from the fact that cash is often described as 'legal tender'. This doesn't mean it's your legal right to use it in a shop. In fact, the Bank of England says that legal tender has a 'narrow technical meaning' to do with paying debts and 'has no real use in everyday life'. However, with millions of people still reliant on or keen to use cash, it makes sense for businesses to make every effort to accept it. Is cash safe to use? Caution in the face of the pandemic is understandable, but just a few weeks into the first lockdown the Bank of England said the risk from banknotes is 'no greater than touching any other common surface, such as handrails, doorknobs or credit cards'. It cemented this position in November, by revealing the results of scientific research into the spread of germs on cash. The research concluded that 'any risk from handling cash should be low', particularly compared with 'high-touch' objects such as shopping baskets, self-checkout touchscreens or products for sale. This should reassure the 42% of shoppers who told us they were using less cash because they thought card payments were safer. The future of cash The proportion of payments made in cash is falling. UK Finance says the figure halved from 46% to 23% between 2014 and 2019. But coins and notes are a long way from obsolete. Between the 5% of people who told us they rely on cash and the 13% who would struggle without it, that's 10 million people not ready - or able - to give up cash. That's not to mention the 22 million who say cash is an essential backup. Which? welcomesthe government's proposal for the FCA to be given the responsibility to oversee the protection of access to cash in the UK , but we are also calling on the government to make the regulator responsible for tracking the number of UK businesses accepting cash and the rate at which this is changing, in order to determine what action is needed and when. It's no good protecting people's access to cash if they have nowhere to spend it. Take action: share your experiences of being unable to pay in cash and the impact this had on you by using our cash acceptance reporting tool . *Name changed. Tagged as: Access to cash More on this Cash refusal threatens people's ability to pay for food and medicine Meet the people fighting to bring cash back Share your experience of being unable to pay with cash Share on Facebook Share on X Share by email Back to top More on this Cash refusal threatens people's ability to pay for food and medicine Meet the people fighting to bring cash back Share your experience of being unable to pay with cash About Us Which? Limited is registered in England and Wales to 2 Marylebone Road, London NW1 4DF, company number 00677665  and is an Introducer Appointed Representative (FRN 610689) of the following: 1. Inspop.com Ltd for the introduction of non-investment motor, home and travel insurance, who are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to provide advice and arrange non-investment motor, home, and travel insurance products (FRN310635). Inspop.com Ltd is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to provide advice and arrange non-investment motor, home, travel insurance products (FRN310635) and is registered in England and Wales to Greyfriars House, Greyfriars Road, Cardiff, South Wales, CF10 3AL, company number 03857130. Confused.com is a trading name of Inspop.com Ltd. 2. LifeSearch Partners Limited (FRN656479), for the introduction of Pure Protection Contracts and Private Health Insurance, who are authorised and regulated by the FCA to provide advice and arrange Pure Protection Contracts and Private Health Insurance Contracts.  LifeSearch Partners Ltd is registered in England and Wales to 3000a Parkway, Whiteley, Hampshire, PO15 7FX, company number 03412386. 3. HUB Financial Solutions, for the introduction of equity release advice and an annuity comparison service, who are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (‘FCA’) to provide advice and guidance on financial products for those who have retired or are approaching retirement (FCA Firm Reference Number: 455713). HUB Financial Solutions is registered in England and Wales to Enterprise House, Bancroft Road, Reigate, Surrey RH12 7RP, company number 05125701. 4. Alan Boswell Insurance Brokers Ltd (FRN 301), for the introduction of non-investment landlord insurances, who are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority to provide advice and arrange insurance contracts. Alan Boswell insurance brokers Ltd is registered in England at Prospect House, Rouen Rd, Norwich NR1 1RE, company number 02591252. 5.Stickee Technology Limited for the introduction of non-investment pet insurance, who are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to arrange non-investment pet insurance products (FRN916665). Stickee Technology Ltd is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)  in England and Wales; 3rd floor, 1 Ashley Road, Altrincham, Cheshire, UK WA14 2DT Registered company number 06711740 6. Travel Insurance Facilities Plc (FRN306537), for the introduction of travel insurance, who are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to arrange non-investment insurance contracts. Registered in England under company number 3220410 at Suite 12, 20 Churchill Square, Kings Hill, West Malling, Kent, ME19 4YU. Other financial services: Mortgage service provided by London & Country Mortgages (L&C), Unit 26 (2.06), Newark Works, 2 Foundry Lane, Bath BA2 3GZ. London & Country are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (registered number: 143002). The FCA does not regulate most Buy to Let mortgages. Your home or property may be repossessed if you do not keep up repayments on your mortgage. We do not make, nor do we seek to make, any recommendations or personalised advice on financial products or services that are regulated by the FCA, as we’re not regulated or authorised by the FCA to advise you in this way. In some cases, however, we have included links to regulated brands or providers with whom we have a commercial relationship and, if you choose to, you can buy a product from our commercial partners. If you go ahead and buy a product using our link, we will receive a commission to help fund our not-for-profit mission and our campaigns work as a champion for the UK consumer. Please note that a link alone does not constitute an endorsement by Which?. Like us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Find us on Instagram Watch us on YouTube Get the Which? app Get the power of Which? in your pocket by downloading our app, giving you on-the-go access to our reviews Got a problem? Chat to a live agent or send us a message Contact us Footer links More from Which? About How we are run Podcasts Newsletters Careers Sitemap Which? Communities The Power in You My account Manage subscriptions Ask Which? For experts Consumer insight Press office Policy For businesses Use our logo Work with us Tradespeople Our legal policies Accessibility Terms & conditions Privacy policy Cookies MSA statement Help Help centre FAQs Subscriptions © Which? 2025