Represent yourself in court: Overview - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Crime, justice and the law Courts, tribunals and appeals Represent yourself in court Skip contents Contents Overview Divorce and separation involving children Divorce and separation: money and property Represent yourself in a criminal court Overview You have the right to speak for yourself in court without a solicitor or other legal professional. You may choose to do this because: you think it’s better to talk directly to the judge, jury or magistrates yourself you cannot afford to pay legal fees If you’re considering representing yourself in a civil (non-criminal) case because you cannot afford legal costs, check if you can get legal aid instead. This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg) . Read Advicenow’s guides to going to court for advice on how to conduct your case. There are different courts and rules in Scotland. Someone with you in court You may be allowed to have someone to help you in court by taking notes and giving advice, but they cannot: speak for you interfere with proceedings sign documents on your behalf This person is known as a ‘McKenzie friend’. The judge will decide whether you can have a McKenzie friend with you in court. Read guidance on what a McKenzie friend can and cannot do . If you need help communicating at your hearing If you need help understanding or taking part in your hearing, you can ask for support from a communication specialist (known as an ‘intermediary’). An intermediary can help by: advising the court or tribunal how best to communicate with you rephrasing questions for you making sure you understand what is happening You can ask for support from an intermediary by email, post or in person at your hearing. Find out how to contact the court or tribunal . Get legal advice You can still get legal advice to help you with your case, even if you choose to represent yourself in court. Find a solicitor . Read advice on what you should consider before going to court for a debt, dispute or personal injury claim. Next : Divorce and separation involving children View a printable version of the whole guide Related content Legal aid Criminal courts Money and property when you divorce or separate Making child arrangements if you divorce or separate What to expect coming to a court or tribunal Explore the topic Courts, tribunals and appeals Elsewhere on the web Wikivorce - free divorce advice Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright