Ostrich | National Geographic | National Geographic An ostrich photographed at Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium in Nebraska Photograph by Joel Sartore, National Geographic Photo Ark Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Animals Photo Ark Ostrich Share Tweet Email Common Name : Ostrich Scientific Name : Struthio camelus Type : Birds Diet : Omnivore Group Name : Herd Average Life Span In The Wild : 30 to 40 years Size : 7 to 9 feet Weight : 220 to 350 pounds Size relative to a 6-ft man : IUCN Red List Status : ? Least concern LC NT VU EN CR EW EX Least Concern Extinct Current Population Trend : Decreasing The flightless ostrich is the world's largest bird. They roam African savanna and desert lands and get most of their water from the plants they eat. Speed and Movement Though they cannot fly, ostriches are fleet, strong runners. They can sprint up to 43 miles an hour and run over distance at 31 miles an hour. They may use their wings as "rudders" to help them change direction while running. An ostrich's powerful, long legs can cover 10 to 16 feet in a single stride. These legs can also be formidable weapons. Ostrich kicks can kill a human or a potential predator like a lion. Each two-toed foot has a long, sharp claw. Herds and Reproduction Ostriches live in small herds that typically contain less than a dozen birds. Alpha males maintain these herds, and mate with the group's dominant hen. The male sometimes mates with others in the group, and wandering males may also mate with lesser hens. All of the group's hens place their eggs in the dominant hen's nest—though her own are given the prominent center place. The dominant hen and male take turns incubating the giant eggs, each one of which weighs as much as two dozen chicken eggs. Behavior and Diet Contrary to popular belief, ostriches do not bury their heads in the sand. The old saw probably originates with one of the bird's defensive behaviors. At the approach of trouble, ostriches will lie low and press their long necks to the ground in an attempt to become less visible. Their plumage blends well with sandy soil and, from a distance, gives the appearance that they have buried their heads in the sand. Ostriches typically eat plants, roots, and seeds but will also eat insects, lizards, or other creatures available in their sometimes harsh habitat. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. 1 / 9 1 / 9 This photo was submitted to Your Shot, our photo community on Instagram. Follow us on Instagram at @natgeoyourshot or visit us at natgeo.com/yourshot for the latest submissions and news about the community. This photo was submitted to Your Shot, our photo community on Instagram. Follow us on Instagram at @natgeoyourshot or visit us at natgeo.com/yourshot for the latest submissions and news about the community. Photograph by Jamie Angus, National Geographic Your Shot Share Tweet Email Legal Terms of Use Privacy Policy Your US State Privacy Rights Children's Online Privacy Policy Interest-Based Ads About Nielsen Measurement Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Our Sites Nat Geo Home Attend a Live Event Book a Trip Buy Maps Inspire Your Kids Shop Nat Geo Visit the D.C. Museum Watch TV Learn About Our Impact Support Our Mission Masthead Press Room Advertise With Us Join Us Subscribe Customer Service Renew Subscription Manage Your Subscription Work at Nat Geo Sign Up for Our Newsletters Contribute to Protect the Planet Follow us National Geographic Instagram National Geographic Facebook National Geographic Twitter National Geographic Youtube National Geographic Linkedin National Geographic Tiktok National Geographic Reddit United States (Change) Copyright © 1996-2015 National Geographic Society Copyright © 2015-2025 National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved