Global Education - Our World in Data Our World in Data Browse by topic Data Insights Resources About Subscribe Donate Gdoc / Admin Global Education By: Hannah Ritchie , Veronika Samborska , Natasha Ahuja , Esteban Ortiz-Ospina , and Max Roser Cite this work Reuse this work Introduction Key Insights Research & Writing Charts A good education offers individuals the opportunity to lead richer, more interesting lives. At a societal level, it creates opportunities for humanity to solve its pressing problems. The world has gone through a dramatic transition over the last few centuries, from one where very few had any basic education to one where most people do. This is not only reflected in the inputs to education – enrollment and attendance – but also in outcomes, where literacy rates have greatly improved. Getting children into school is also not enough. What they learn matters. There are large differences in educational outcomes : in low-income countries, most children cannot read by the end of primary school. These inequalities in education exacerbate poverty and existing inequalities in global incomes . On this page, you can find all of our writing and data on global education. Related topics Literacy Financing Education Research and Development Key insights on Global Education The world has made substantial progress in increasing basic levels of education Despite being in school, many children don’t learn basic literacy skills Children across the world receive very different amounts of quality learning Hundreds of millions of children worldwide do not go to school The gender gap in school attendance has closed across most of the world The world has made substantial progress in increasing basic levels of education Access to education is now seen as a fundamental right – in many cases, it’s the government’s duty to provide it. But formal education is a very recent phenomenon. In the chart, we see the share of the adult population – those older than 15 – that has received some basic education and those who haven’t. In the early 1800s, fewer than 1 in 5 adults had some basic education. Education was a luxury; in all places, it was only available to a small elite. But you can see that this share has grown dramatically, such that this ratio is now reversed. Less than 1 in 5 adults has not received any formal education. This is reflected in literacy data , too: 200 years ago, very few could read and write. Now most adults have basic literacy skills. What you should know about this data Basic education is defined as receiving some kind of formal primary, secondary, or tertiary (post-secondary) education. This indicator does not tell us how long a person received formal education. They could have received a full program of schooling, or may only have been in attendance for a short period. To account for such differences, researchers measure the mean years of schooling or the expected years of schooling . Despite being in school, many children don’t learn basic literacy skills International statistics often focus on attendance as the marker of educational progress. However, being in school does not guarantee that a child receives high-quality education. In fact, in many countries, the data shows that children learn very little. In the chart you can see the share of students at the end of primary education that could read with comprehension. This means they achieved minimum proficiency in identify key ideas in texts and connect them to their own experiences. In many lower-income countries, less than 20% of children achieve this by the end of primary school. Making sure that every child gets to go to school is essential. But the world also needs to focus on what children learn once they’re in the classroom. Read more: Millions of children learn only very little. How can the world provide a better education to the next generation? Research suggests that many children — especially in the world’s poorest countries — learn only very little in school. What can we do to improve this? What you should know about this data This data does not capture total literacy over someone’s lifetime. Many children will learn to read eventually, even if they cannot read by the end of primary school. However, this means they are in a constant state of “catching up” and will leave formal education far behind where they could be. Children across the world receive very different amounts of quality learning There are still significant inequalities in the amount of education children get across the world. This can be measured as the total number of years that children spend in school. However, researchers can also adjust for the quality of education to estimate how many years of quality learning they receive. This is done using an indicator called “learning-adjusted years of schooling”. On the map, you see vast differences across the world. In many of the world’s poorest countries, children receive less than three years of learning-adjusted schooling. In most rich countries, this is more than 10 years. Across most countries in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa – where the largest share of children live – the average years of quality schooling are less than 7. What you should know about this data Learning-adjusted years of schooling merge the quantity and quality of education into one metric, accounting for the fact that similar durations of schooling can yield different learning outcomes. Learning-adjusted years is computed by adjusting the expected years of school based on the quality of learning, as measured by the harmonized test scores from various international student achievement testing programs. The adjustment involves multiplying the expected years of school by the ratio of the most recent harmonized test score to 625. Here, 625 signifies advanced attainment on the TIMSS (Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study) test, with 300 representing minimal attainment. These scores are measured in TIMSS-equivalent units. Hundreds of millions of children worldwide do not go to school While most children worldwide get the opportunity to go to school, hundreds of millions still don’t. In the chart, we see the number of children who aren’t in school across primary and secondary education. This number was around 244 million in 2023. Many children who attend primary school drop out and do not attend secondary school. That means many more children or adolescents are missing from secondary school than primary education. Read more: Access to basic education: almost 60 million children of primary school age are not in school The world has made a lot of progress in recent generations, but millions of children are still not in school. The gender gap in school attendance has closed across most of the world Globally, until recently, boys were more likely to attend school than girls. The world has focused on closing this gap to ensure every child gets the opportunity to go to school. Today, these gender gaps have largely disappeared. In the chart, we see the difference in the global enrollment rates for primary, secondary, and tertiary (post-secondary) education. The share of children who complete primary school is also shown. We see these lines converging over time, and recently they met: rates between boys and girls are the same. For tertiary education, young women are now more likely than young men to be enrolled. While the differences are small globally, there are some countries where the differences are still large: girls in Chad, for example, are much less likely to go to school than boys. Research & Writing Millions of children learn only very little. How can the world provide a better education to the next generation? Max Roser Talent is everywhere, opportunity is not. We are all losing out because of this. Max Roser Access to basic education: Almost 60 million children of primary school age are not in school Max Roser Key Charts on Global Education See all charts on this topic Share of children in primary school age who are in school Average learning-adjusted years of schooling Children and adolescents out of school Gender gap in primary, secondary and tertiary education Girls and boys of primary school age who are out of school Literate and illiterate world population Primary, secondary and tertiary education enrolment and completion rates Primary-school-age children who are out of school by world region Share of population with no formal education Share of the population with at least some formal education Share of the world's population with formal basic education Average learning outcomes Average learning outcomes vs. GDP per capita Average performance of 15-year-olds in mathematics, reading, and science Average years of schooling Barro and Lee (2015); Lee and Lee (2016) Average years of schooling UNDP Average years of schooling vs. GDP per capita Average years of schooling, adjusted gender parity index Completion rate of lower secondary education Completion rate of primary education Completion rate of upper secondary education Duration of compulsory education Duration of pre-primary education Expected years of schooling Government spending on education as a share of GDP Gross enrolment ratio in secondary education Gross enrolment ratio in tertiary education Lower secondary school completion rates, adjusted gender parity index Net attendance rate of primary school Net enrolment rates in lower secondary education, adjusted gender parity index Net enrolment rates in primary education, adjusted gender parity index Number of adults with no formal education by region Official entrance age to pre-primary education Percentage of teachers in lower-secondary education who are qualified Percentage of teachers in pre-primary education who are qualified Percentage of teachers in primary education who are qualified Primary school completion rates, adjusted gender parity index Primary school life expectancy, adjusted gender parity index Pupils per qualified teacher in primary education Quality vs. quantity of schooling Share enrolled in private institutions at the primary education level Share of children achieving minimum proficiency in reading and math at each education level Share of children achieving minimum reading proficiency by the end of primary education age Share of primary-school-age children who are out of school Share of secondary school teachers who are women Share of students achieving minimum proficiency in reading and math at each education level Share of students achieving minimum reading proficiency by the end of primary education Share of students from abroad Share of students studying abroad Share of the population with lower secondary education Share of the population with post-secondary education or higher Share of the population with tertiary education Share of women graduating from STEM programs in tertiary education Upper secondary completion rate, adjusted gender parity index Average performance of 15-year-old girls and boys in mathematics Average performance of 15-year-old girls and boys in reading Average performance of 15-year-old girls and boys in sciences Average years of schooling vs. expected years of schooling Expected years of schooling vs. share in extreme poverty Official entrance age to compulsory education Population by level of education with projections Share enrolled in private institutions at the pre-primary education level Share of primary schools with access to drinking water Share of primary schools with toilets Share of primary-school-age children who are out of school vs. GDP per capita Chart 1 of 65 Cite this work Our articles and data visualizations rely on work from many different people and organizations. When citing this topic page, please also cite the underlying data sources. This topic page can be cited as: Hannah Ritchie, Veronika Samborska, Natasha Ahuja, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Max Roser (2023) - “Global Education” Published online at OurWorldinData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/global-education' [Online Resource] BibTeX citation @article{owid-global-education,
    author = {Hannah Ritchie and Veronika Samborska and Natasha Ahuja and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina and Max Roser},
    title = {Global Education},
    journal = {Our World in Data},
    year = {2023},
    note = {https://ourworldindata.org/global-education}
} Reuse this work freely All visualizations, data, and code produced by Our World in Data are completely open access under the Creative Commons BY license . You have the permission to use, distribute, and reproduce these in any medium, provided the source and authors are credited. The data produced by third parties and made available by Our World in Data is subject to the license terms from the original third-party authors. We will always indicate the original source of the data in our documentation, so you should always check the license of any such third-party data before use and redistribution. All of our charts can be embedded in any site. Our World in Data is free and accessible for everyone. Help us do this work by making a donation. Donate now Our World in Data is a project of Global Change Data Lab , a nonprofit based in the UK (Reg. Charity No. 1186433). Our charts, articles, and data are licensed under CC BY , unless stated otherwise. Tools and software we develop are open source under the MIT license . Third-party materials, including some charts and data, are subject to third-party licenses. See our FAQs for more details. Explore Topics Data Insights Resources Latest Articles SDG Tracker Teaching with OWID About About Us Organization Funding Team Jobs FAQs RSS Feeds Research & Writing Data Insights Follow us Privacy policy Legal disclaimer Grapher license