Is it illegal to record a conversation with someone in the UK without their permission? | The Sun UK Edition US Edition Scottish Sun Irish Sun Search Search Sign in My Account Sun Club The Sun Sun Club News Sport Fabulous TV Showbiz Money Travel Health Motors Tech Royals Wellness Dear Deidre Puzzles Betting Shopping Topics A-Z More More from The Sun Newsletters Deliver my newspaper Dream Team Sun Bingo Sun Jobs Sun Savers £9.50 Hols The Sun Digital Newspaper Fabulous Clothing UK News World News Health News Politics Opinion News OFF THE RECORD Is it illegal to record a conversation with someone in the UK without their permission? Published: 07:45, 6 Oct 2023 Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window) Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) IF you struggle with your memory or want to gather evidence of a telephone scam et cetera, recording the conversation might seem like the most sensible option. But is it illegal to record a conversation in the UK without the other person’s consent? It is not a criminal offence to record a personal phone call without telling the other person Is it illegal to record a conversation in the UK? Having a conversation with someone while recording what they’re saying is not illegal in most cases. There are stricter rules on the distribution of the material picked up on the device. The regulations vary between businesses and individuals. Generally speaking, it’s not a crime to record a conversation without telling someone. READ MORE ON LAWS opening up Kim Kardashian breaks down in tears and sobs as its revealed she failed law exam And although it could potentially be considered a breach of their privacy , it’s not a criminal offence to secretly record calls for your own use. It’s more of a possible civil wrong, which can be redressed with a claim for damages. The legal aspect comes in to the equation if someone shares the recording without the consent of the people on the call. If you sell a recording to a third-party or release it to the public without consent from others involved in the conversation, this enters murky legal waters and could be a criminal offence. READ MORE IN THE SUN opening up Kim Kardashian breaks down in tears and sobs as its revealed she failed law exam However, journalists can publish secret recordings without a legal backlash, provided they can prove the released recording is in the public interest. What can you do if someone records your conversation without consent? If another person has recorded your conversation without your consent, there isn’t much you can do, legally speaking. The closest you’d get to legal action would be a civil claim, where you could potentially win a damages payout if you can prove your privacy was breached. However, it’s a far more serious breach of the law if a business has recorded a call without one of the legal justifications. Secret government phone recording also goes on for security reasons, but this only takes place when spooks are given a legal warrant to do so. So the state shouldn’t be snooping in on your calls unless they have a reason to suspect you’re up to something. Is it legal for businesses to record phone calls without telling you? While conversations between individuals aren’t really regulated, there are laws in place to stop businesses recording conversations. GDPR  — the General Data Protection Regulation — came into effect in 2016. However, since Brexit t he Data Protection Act 2018 is the UK’s implementation of GDPR. Everyone in a position of responsibility must obey the following rules when using personal data and ensure the information is: used fairly, lawfully and transparently used for specified, explicit purposes used in a way that is adequate, relevant and limited to only what is necessary accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date kept for no longer than is necessary handled in a way that ensures appropriate security, including protection against unlawful or unauthorised processing, access, loss, destruction or damage There is stronger legal protection for more sensitive information, including: race ethnicity political opinions/affiliation religious beliefs trade union membership genetics biometrics (where used for identification) health sex life or orientation There are also separate safeguards for personal data in relation to criminal convictions and offences. We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours. Topics EVG Explainers YOU MIGHT LIKE YOU MIGHT LIKE RECOMMENDED FOR YOU MORE FOR YOU Follow The Sun Services Sign Up To The Sun About Us Editorial Complaints Policies and Ethics Clarifications and Corrections News Licensing Advertising Contact Us Commissioning Terms Help Hub Topic A-Z Cookie Settings Contact Preferences Sun Jobs Shopping How our Product Reviews team test our products The Times & The Sunday Times Pay to Reject ©News Group Newspapers Limited in England No. 679215 Registered office: 1 London Bridge Street, London, SE1 9GF. "The Sun", "Sun", "Sun Online" are registered trademarks or trade names of News Group Newspapers Limited. This service is provided on News Group Newspapers' Limited's Standard Terms and Conditions in accordance with our Privacy & Cookie Policy . To inquire about a licence to reproduce material, visit our Syndication site. View our online Press Pack. For other inquiries, Contact Us . To see all content on The Sun, please use the Site Map. The Sun website is regulated by the Independent Press Standards Organisation (IPSO) Our journalists strive for accuracy but on occasion we make mistakes. For further details of our complaints policy and to make a complaint please click this link: thesun.co.uk/editorial-complaints/