Is washing and cleaning on New Year’s Day bad luck? | Metro News Metro logo Search Metro Search Metro Close Search Close Search My Account My Account Open Site Menu Open Site Menu Close Site Menu Close Site Menu Small logo Home Expand Home Submenu Expand Home Submenu Trending Newsletters Puzzles Video News Expand News Submenu Expand News Submenu UK London US World Crime Tech Science Politics News Updates newsletter E-edition Entertainment Expand Entertainment Submenu Expand Entertainment Submenu Showbiz TV Film Music Gaming Strictly Come Dancing I’m A Celebrity Sport Expand Sport Submenu Expand Sport Submenu Football Premier League Transfer News Cricket Boxing Tennis Snooker Football Newsletter – In The Mixer Lifestyle Expand Lifestyle Submenu Expand Lifestyle Submenu Sex Health Property Food Travel Horoscopes Money Shopping Lifeline The Slice newsletter Soaps Expand Soaps Submenu Expand Soaps Submenu EastEnders Emmerdale Coronation Street Hollyoaks Soaps Showbiz Soaps Newsletter Opinion Expand Opinion Submenu Expand Opinion Submenu Columnists Letters Cartoons Shopping Expand Shopping Submenu Expand Shopping Submenu Beauty Products Black Friday Amazon Prime Day Shopping Newsletter Puzzles Expand Puzzles Submenu Expand Puzzles Submenu Quick Crossword Cryptic Crossword Word Wheel Hangman Easy Sudoku Medium Sudoku Hard Sudoku Money Expand Money Submenu Expand Money Submenu Investing Cost of Living Deals Hacks Saving Property Expand Property Submenu Expand Property Submenu What I Rent What I Own Property Prices Home renovations Interiors Renting Better Living The Key Newsletter Travel Expand Travel Submenu Expand Travel Submenu Travel Advice Travel Reviews Travel Inspiration The Getaway Horoscopes Expand Horoscopes Submenu Expand Horoscopes Submenu Your Daily Horoscope Astrology Tarot Chinese Zodiac Daily Horoscope Newsletter More Expand More Submenu Expand More Submenu Games Submit Stuff Competitions Advertise Weather Trending Privacy Policy Metro on Instagram Metro on Facebook Metro on X Metro on TikTok The reason washing and cleaning on New Year’s Day is considered bad luck Elizabeth Atkin Published January 1, 2025 11:57am Updated January 1, 2025 12:02pm Share this article via whatsapp Share this article via x Copy the link to this article. Link is copied Share this article via facebook Comment now Comments You might want to put the broom down and have a cup of tea! (Picture: Getty Images) Mopping grubby floors, sorting the laundry, and finally getting your house may seem like a positive way to start 2025, but is it bad luck to clean on New Year’s Day ? That’s right, don’t grab your bucket and bleach yet, because superstition says you should avoid doing chores on January 1. So, if your New Year’s Eve celebrations mean that a hangover has stapled you to the sofa, you might have just found the perfect excuse. Result! So, why is cleaning on New Year’s Day said to bring bad luck? Here’s what you need to know. Why is it bad luck to clean on New Year’s Day? Much of the folklore surrounding cleaning at New Year seems to date back to Chinese traditions , but many of the superstitions are observed around the world. If you’re superstitious, hang fire on the cleaning (Picture: Getty) Many cultures have superstitions, myths, and old wives’ tales that say you shouldn’t do any cleaning at all on January 1. For instance, doing laundry on the first day of the year is said to ‘wash away a loved one’, meaning that a friend or family member will pass away in the following 364 days – Now, if that’s not a reason to steer clear of JCloths, we don’t know what is! Washing clothes or dishes on New Year’s Day will simply ‘wash away good luck’ and sweeping the floors could also sweep away good fortune. If only our laundry basket looked like this (Picture: Getty Images) Even emptying your bins and taking out the rubbish is also a big no-no on New Year’s Day, as superstition says that removing things from the house could encourage prosperity to disappear. Some traditions from various parts of the world also say that what you do on the first day of the year will reflect how the rest of it pans out. So piling into the housework on January 1 suggests you’re in for another 364 days of hard, boring graft – and nobody wants that. Of course, these are all just myths. But we’ll probably leave the bins, just in case. What brings good luck on New Year’s Day? There’s lots you can do to attract good luck. (Picture: Getty Images) Well, for one thing, taking a break from the boring stuff isn’t all bad. More Trending Play Video New Neo robot housekeeper could be yours for £15,000 - but can't close the dishwasher Channel: Tech Tech October 30, 2025 By Jen Mills The little-known bakery chain with 'unreal' food quietly taking over Greggs shops My honest review of the $1,000,000,000 Grand Egyptian Museum that took 20 years to build What does the week have in store? Tarot horoscope reading for November 24 to November 30 Enjoy your chore-free day, and take some time for yourself – banish any feelings of guilt. Several New Year traditions are said to invite good luck , good fortune, and possibly even wealth into your life. These include: Eating 12 grapes at midnight Wearing white Taking a stroll with an empty suitcase (to bring good fortune to travel). Or, if you’re sure it’s all baloney, then get vacuuming and put those bins out! Follow Metro across our social channels, on Facebook , Twitter and Instagram Share your views in the comments below Arrow MORE: Liam Payne fans ‘in tears’ noticing nod to late singer during London’s New Year’s Eve fireworks Arrow MORE: The best New Year’s Day TV – The Traitors returns and bonus Gavin and Stacey Arrow MORE: Fans defend Sophie Ellis-Bextor after her New Year’s Eve show branded ‘a cringey mess’ Comment now Comments Add Metro as a Preferred Source on Google Add as preferred source Home divider Lifestyle Related topics Cleaning New Year New Year's Day New Year's Eve What does the week have in store? Tarot horoscope reading for November 24 to November 30 Channel: Horoscopes Horoscopes 11 hours ago By Kerry King Daily horoscope November 23, 2025: Today's predictions for your star sign Channel: Horoscopes Horoscopes 15 hours ago By Patrick Arundell Someone caught your eye on the commute? Let them know Must Read My life with four stone O-Cup breasts that won’t stop growing Channel: Health Health 6 days ago By Alice Giddings I have to use a 'penetration buffer' with my boyfriend during sex Channel: Sex Sex November 14, 2025 By Alice Giddings M&S shoppers absolutely flabbergasted over 'ridiculous' £195 Christmas dish Channel: Food Food 5 days ago By Courtney Pochin We're trapped in a flat no buyer will touch because of £7,500 charge Channel: Property Property 2 days ago By Metro Lifestyle reporter Everything that happens to your body when you haven’t had sex for a while Channel: Sex Sex November 15, 2025 By Eleanor Noyce 'We invited a homeless man for dinner - he stayed for 45 years' Channel: Lifestyle Lifestyle 3 days ago By Sarah Ingram This is the best time of day to have sex, according to your age Channel: Sex Sex 3 days ago By Eleanor Noyce The first-class train hack that annoyed my boyfriend but saved us a fortune Channel: Travel Travel 1 day ago By Chelsea Dickenson Every single destination Ryanair is axing in its 2026 holiday cull Channel: Travel Travel 6 days ago By Charlie Sawyer Martin Lewis reveals shop that's 'winner' for cheap Christmas — and it's not a supermarket Channel: Money Money 4 days ago By Courtney Pochin Trending Now Read more stories Read more stories What does the week have in store? Tarot horoscope reading for November 24 to November 30 Channel: Horoscopes Horoscopes 11 hours ago By Kerry King My honest review of the $1,000,000,000 Grand Egyptian Museum that took 20 years to build 'Simply spectacular' country named the world's top destination to visit in 2026 The maximum amount of money you should keep in your current account The little-known bakery chain with 'unreal' food quietly taking over Greggs shops Metro Shorts Metro logo © 2025 Associated Newspapers Limited Powered by WordPress.com VIP Your ad choices IPSO Regulated Contributors Newzit Daily Mail Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Do not sell or share my personal information Site map Contact Us About Metro on Instagram Metro on Facebook Metro on X Metro on TikTok