Can a Fetal Heart Rate Predict a Baby's Sex? What Research Says Healthline Health Conditions Health Conditions All Breast Cancer Cancer Care Caregiving for Alzheimer's Disease Chronic Kidney Disease Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Digestive Health Eye Health Heart Health Menopause Mental Health Migraine Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Parkinson’s Disease Psoriasis Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) Sleep Health Type 2 Diabetes Weight Management Condition Spotlight All Controlling Ulcerative Colitis Navigating Life with Bipolar Disorder Mastering Geographic Atrophy Managing Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wellness Topics All CBD Fitness Healthy Aging Hearing Mental Well-Being Nutrition Parenthood Recipes Sexual Health Skin Care Sleep Health Vitamins and Supplements Women's Wellness Product Reviews All At-Home Testing Men's Health Mental Health Nutrition Sleep Vitamins and Supplements Women's Health Featured Programs All Your Guide to Glucose Health Inflammation and Aging Cold & Flu Season Survival Guide She’s Good for Real Tools Featured Video Series Pill Identifier FindCare Drugs A-Z Medicare Plans by State Lessons All Crohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis Essentials Diabetes Nutrition High Cholesterol Taming Inflammation in Psoriasis Taming Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis Newsletters All Anxiety and Depression Digestive Health Heart Health Migraine Nutrition Edition Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wire Lifestyle Quizzes Find a Diet Find Healthy Snacks Weight Management How Well Do You Sleep? Are You a Workaholic? Featured Health News All Medicare 2026 Changes Can 6-6-6 Walking Workout Help You Lose Weight? This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication 5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer Life Morning Coffee May Help You Live Longer This Just In 5 Tips for a Healthy Lifestyle How to Disinfect Your House After the Flu Best Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025 Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots? Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your Health Top Reads Best Multivitamins for Women Best Multivitamins for Men Best Online Therapy Services Online Therapy That Takes Insurance Buy Ozempic Online Mounjaro Overview Video Series Youth in Focus Healthy Harvest Through an Artist's Eye Future of Health Connect Find Your Bezzy Community Bezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app. All Breast Cancer Multiple Sclerosis Depression Migraine Type 2 Diabetes Psoriasis Follow us on social media Can't get enough? Connect with us for all things health. Subscribe Parenthood Stages Becoming a Parent Pregnancy Postpartum Baby Toddler Fertility Health & Wellness Conditions & Concerns Relationships Products Can a Baby's Heart Rate Predict Its Sex? Medically reviewed by Barry I Aron, MD, FACOG, MSCP — Written by Ashley Marcin — Updated on August 18, 2025 Research When sex is determined Accurate gender tests Takeaway The idea that a baby’s heart rate can predict sex is a myth. In fact, there seems to be little difference in the average beats per minute between males and females. You may have heard that your baby’s heart rate can predict its sex as early as the first trimester. If it’s over 140 bpm, you’re having a baby girl. Below 140 bpm, you’re carrying a boy. The truth is, research into this topic says heart rate is not a reliable indicator of your child’s sex. Your baby’s heart will likely start beating sometime around week 6 of your pregnancy. You can even see and measure this flicker of light on an ultrasound. The beats per minute (bpm) start at a slow 90 to 110 bpm and increase daily. This article examines what research has discovered about heart rate and the sex of your baby. What research says about heart rate and a baby’s sex Research has found no significant difference between male and female heart rates during early pregnancy. A 2023 review of studies found that fetal heart rate is not a reliable early predictor of a baby’s sex. A 2016 study also found no significant difference between female and male fetal heart rates during the first trimester. A 2018 study that used a cardiotocograph (cCTG) to assess male and female fetal heart rates found that male fetuses had a lower baseline fetal heart rate and greater variability compared to female fetuses. However, the absolute differences were small and not estimated to be of major clinical significance. When is sex determined? A baby’s sex is set as soon as the sperm meets the egg. Sex is determined at conception, before you even know you’re pregnant. The genitals won’t develop for some time, but your little one inherits either an X or Y chromosome. In most cases, little girls carry an XX pattern of genetic information, while little boys carry an XY. You might also be surprised to learn that your baby’s genitals don’t develop immediately. In fact, boys and girls look relatively the same four to six weeks after gestation. They start to differ between 10 and 20 weeks. What tests accurately reveal a baby’s sex? Though heart rate measurements may not reveal your baby’s sex, there are plenty of other tests that can tell you your baby’s sex before you deliver. These include: cell-free DNA tests genetic testing ultrasounds Cell-free DNA Blood tests called cell-free DNA tests have cropped up over the last several years. You can get one as early as around week 9 of your pregnancy. The main goal of these tests is not to determine the sex of your child. Instead, they screen for possible genetic abnormalities . Any possible diagnosis you receive should be confirmed with further testing. Genetic testing A little later on in your pregnancy, your doctor may give you the option of having an amniocentesis or chorionic villi sampling (CVS). These tests look for genetic abnormalities, just like the cell-free DNA. As a result, it can reveal the sex of your baby. These tests are more accurate than the cell-free blood tests, but also more invasive and carry some miscarriage risk. A CVS test is typically performed somewhere between weeks 10 and 13 . An amniocentesis is usually performed later, between weeks 14 and 20 . Before you sign on to find out your baby’s sex this way, pause for a moment. These tests do carry potential risks to the baby, so they aren’t usually recommended unless you: have received positive results from a cell-free DNA test had a chromosomal condition in another pregnancy are over age 35 have a family history of a certain genetic disorder The ultrasound The most common time when people find out the sex of their babies is between weeks 18 and 20. Many doctors perform an anatomy scan around this point in pregnancy to examine your baby’s features and inner workings from head to toe. During this noninvasive test, your technician will put gel on your tummy and use a probe to take photos of your baby. Your little one will have a series of measurements to ensure they are growing well. The tech will also look at the body’s systems, the fluid levels around the baby, and the placenta. You’ll likely be given the option to find out the sex and get some photos to hang on your refrigerator. The tech can often see the baby’s genitals clearly on the screen and make a pretty solid, educational guess. Occasionally, due to the baby’s position, finding out the sex may be difficult. Takeaway Science says that heart rate in early pregnancy is not a reliable indicator of your baby’s sex. So keep guessing along with your friends and family. Soon enough, you should be able to confirm boy or girl at your anatomy ultrasound — or at the very least, on your delivery day. Want to stay in the loop with more pregnancy information tailored to your due date? Sign up for our I’m Expecting newsletter . Parenthood Pregnancy Pregnancy Health How we reviewed this article: Sources History Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy . Alfirevic Z, et al. (2017). Continuous cardiotocography (CTG) as a form of electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) for fetal assessment during labour. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6464257/ Bhide A, et al. (2018). Sex differences in fetal heart rate and variability assessed by antenatal computerized cardiotocography. https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/aogs.13437 Bracero LA, et al. (2016). First trimester fetal heart rate as a predictor of newborn sex. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25754210/ Nouri S, et al. (2023). The role of fetal heart rate in first trimester sonograms in prediction of fetal sex: A systematic review and meta-analysis. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37573392/ Share this article Medically reviewed by Barry I Aron, MD, FACOG, MSCP — Written by Ashley Marcin — Updated on August 18, 2025 related stories Myths vs. Facts: Signs You’re Having a Baby Girl Myths vs. Facts: Signs You’re Having a Baby Boy What Your Baby’s Position in the Womb Means What Color Hair Will My Baby Have? The Ramzi Theory: Is It for Real? Read this next Myths vs. Facts: Signs You’re Having a Baby Girl Medically reviewed by Debra Sullivan, Ph.D., MSN, R.N., CNE, COI Expecting? You're probably excited to find out if it’s a girl or boy. Here's a look at seven myths and facts about the sex reveal. If you feel a… READ MORE Myths vs. Facts: Signs You’re Having a Baby Boy If you’re expecting and hoping for a boy, there are plenty of old wives’ tales about sex. Here are five of the most popular myths on uncovering the… READ MORE What Your Baby’s Position in the Womb Means Medically reviewed by Debra Sullivan, Ph.D., MSN, R.N., CNE, COI The positions of your baby in the womb becomes important as your due date approaches because they should be in the best position for delivery. As your… READ MORE What Color Hair Will My Baby Have? Medically reviewed by Nicole Galan, RN Brunette, blonde, or redhead? Here's how to tell what color hair your baby-to-be might have. READ MORE The Ramzi Theory: Is It for Real? Medically reviewed by Holly Ernst, PA-C Some people believe the Ramzi theory can determine fetal sex as early as 6 weeks into pregnancy. But only one study has looked at this theory, so… READ MORE What You Need to Know if Your Baby Is Breech Medically reviewed by Michael Weber, MD A breech pregnancy presents a few different challenges for both mother and baby. Here’s what to do. READ MORE What the Heck Is a Baby Box? Medically reviewed by Karen Gill, M.D. The baby box is going global. Time to find out what is in it and where to get one. READ MORE Does Taking Mucinex When Trying to Conceive Make Pregnancy More Likely? Some people believe that Mucinex can help them get pregnant, but there is no scientific evidence to support this. Learn more here. READ MORE Is It Safe to Have a Pap Smear During Pregnancy? If you are overdue for a pap smear or at high risk for cervical cancer, you may have a Pap smear during your pregnancy. They are safe. READ MORE A Guide to Advocating for Yourself During Labor Advocating for yourself during childbirth can feel challenging. However, there are many steps you can take to ensure you feel safe and in control. READ MORE © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Advertising Policy Health Topics Sitemap Medical Affairs Content Integrity Newsletters © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Careers Advertise with us OUR BRANDS Healthline Medical News Today Greatist Psych Central Bezzy