THE REPORTS OF MY DEATH ARE GREATLY EXAGGERATED Definition & Meaning | Dictionary.com Games Daily Crossword Word Puzzle Word Finder All games Featured Word of the Day Word of the Year New words Language stories All featured Culture Slang Emoji Memes Acronyms Gender and sexuality All culture Writing tips Writing hub Grammar essentials Commonly confused All writing tips Games Featured Culture Writing tips Advertisement Skip to Skip to The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated Definitions ( 1 ) Advertisement The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated The text of a cable sent by Mark Twain from London to the press in the United States after his obituary had been mistakenly published. Discover More Example Sentences Examples are provided to illustrate real-world usage of words in context. Any opinions expressed do not reflect the views of Dictionary.com. In response to a rumor that he was gravely ill and possibly dead, Mark Twain wrote to a newspaper that “the reports of my death are greatly exaggerated.” Read more on Washington Post The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated. Read more on The Guardian September 9: At an iPod product launch, Jobs jokes about his health by walking on stage in front of a giant screen that flashed "The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated" -- a quotation borrowed from Mark Twain. Read more on Reuters "The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated," flashed a screen above Jobs at a conference in September 2008. Read more on Washington Post And after Bloomberg News accidentally published a version of his obituary, Jobs spoke in front of a giant slide that read, "The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated." Read more on Time Magazine Archive Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement thereon The Republic Browse # aa bb cc dd ee ff gg hh ii jj kk ll mm nn oo pp qq rr ss tt uu vv ww xx yy zz About Careers Contact us Cookies, terms, & privacy Do not sell my info Help Follow us Get the Word of the Day every day! Sign up By clicking "Sign Up", you are accepting Dictionary.com Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policies. © 2025 Dictionary.com, LLC