Poverty - Our World in Data Our World in Data Browse by topic Data Insights Resources About Subscribe Donate Gdoc / Admin Poverty By: Joe Hasell , Bertha Rohenkohl , Pablo Arriagada , Esteban Ortiz-Ospina , and Max Roser Cite this work Reuse this work Introduction Key Insights Data Explorer Research & Writing Charts Global poverty is one of the most pressing problems that the world faces today. The poorest in the world are often undernourished and without access to basic services such as electricity and safe drinking water ; they have less access to education and suffer from much poorer health . In order to make progress against such poverty in the future, we need to understand poverty around the world today and how it has changed. On this page you can find all our data, visualizations and writing relating to poverty. This work aims to help you understand the scale of the problem today; where progress has been achieved and where it has not; what can be done to make progress against poverty in the future; and the methods behind the data on which this knowledge is based. Related topics Economic Growth Economic Inequality Key Insights on Poverty Measuring global poverty in an unequal world Global extreme poverty declined substantially over the last generation Hundreds of millions will remain in extreme poverty on current trends The rapid progress seen in many countries shows that an end to poverty is possible After 200 years of progress, the fight against global poverty is just beginning Measuring global poverty in an unequal world There is no single definition of poverty. Our understanding of the extent of poverty and how it is changing depends on which definition we have in mind. In particular, richer and poorer countries set very different poverty lines in order to measure poverty in a way that is informative and relevant to the level of incomes of their citizens. For instance, while a person in the United States is counted as being in poverty if they live on less than $27.10 per day, in Ethiopia, the poverty line is set more than ten times lower — at $2.59 per day. You can explore national poverty lines and read more about how they are calculated in this footnote. 1 Because the definition of poverty varies so widely, national poverty lines can’t be used to compare poverty across countries. To measure poverty globally, we need to use a poverty line that is applied consistently across all countries. This is the goal of the International Poverty Line of $3 per day — shown in red in the chart — which is set by the World Bank and used by the UN to monitor extreme poverty around the world. In global terms, we see that this is an extremely low threshold, set to represent the typical poverty lines adopted in the world’s poorest countries. It marks an incredibly low standard of living — a level of income much lower than just the cost of a healthy diet . $3 a day: A new poverty line has shifted the World Bank’s data on extreme poverty. What changed, and why? In June 2025, the World Bank increased its extreme poverty estimates by 125 million people. This doesn’t mean the world has gotten poorer: it reflects a new, higher International Poverty Line of $3 a day, up from $2.15. What you should know about this data Global poverty data relies on national household surveys that have differences affecting their comparability across countries or over time. In this chart, the data for the United States and Turkey relates to incomes, and the data for the other countries relates to consumption expenditure. 2 The poverty lines here are an approximation of national definitions of poverty, made in order to allow comparisons across the countries. 1 Non-market sources of income, including food grown by subsistence farmers for their own consumption, are taken into account. 3 Data is expressed in international-$ at 2021 prices, which means that inflation and differences in living costs across countries are taken into account. 4 Download image Global extreme poverty declined substantially over the last generation Extreme poverty has declined hugely over the past generation. This is one of the most important ways our world has changed over this time. Today, there are more than 1.5 billion fewer people living below the International Poverty Line of $3 per day than in 1990. This means, on average, that the number declined by about 42.9 million per year, or about 118,000 people every day over these 35 years. 5 The COVID-19 pandemic had a terrible impact on the world’s poorest. According to the World Bank, the number of people in extreme poverty increased by around 50 million between 2019 and 2020, marking the first substantial rise in a generation. Since 2020, progress in reducing extreme poverty has resumed, but at a slower pace than before. The scale of global poverty today remains vast. The latest global estimates for 2025 show that around 800 million people are in extreme poverty. This means that roughly one in ten people are living on less than $3 a day. Extreme poverty: How far have we come, and how far do we still have to go? The world has made immense progress against extreme poverty, but it is still the reality for almost one in ten people worldwide. What you should know about this data Extreme poverty here is defined according to the UN’s definition of living on less than $3 a day — an extremely low threshold needed to monitor and draw attention to the living conditions of the poorest around the world. Read more in our article, The $3 a day International Poverty Line . Global poverty data relies on national household surveys that have differences affecting their comparability across countries or over time. 2 Non-market sources of income, including food grown by subsistence farmers for their own consumption, are taken into account. 3 Surveys are less frequently available in poorer countries and for earlier decades. To produce regional and global poverty estimates, the World Bank collates the closest survey for each country and projects the data forward or backward to the year being estimated. 6 Global estimates rely on coverage rules to determine whether a country has recent survey data that can be used for meaningful regional and global figures. Typically, a country is considered to have sufficient data if it has a survey conducted within three years of the reference year. During the COVID-19 pandemic, coverage rules had to be adjusted. Estimates in 2020, 2021, and 2022 do not consider surveys before 2020. Analogously, estimates in 2017, 2018, and 2019 do not consider surveys from 2020 and after. Data is expressed in international-$ at 2021 prices, which means that inflation and differences in living costs across countries are taken into account. 4 Hundreds of millions will remain in extreme poverty on current trends Extreme poverty declined during the last generation because the majority of people living on the lowest incomes lived in countries that experienced strong economic growth, particularly in Asia. Today, most people living in extreme poverty are in Sub-Saharan Africa, where weak economic growth and high population growth in many countries have led to a rising number of people living in extreme poverty. The chart shows the number of people in extreme poverty, with projections until 2030 produced by World Bank researchers based on economic growth forecasts. 7 A very bleak future is ahead of us should such weak economic growth in the world’s poorest countries continue — a future in which extreme poverty is the reality for hundreds of millions for many years to come. The economies that are home to the poorest billions of people need to grow if we want global poverty to decline substantially The majority of the world today is poor: 85% of the world live on less than $30 per day. We need economic growth to alleviate global poverty. What you should know about this data Extreme poverty here is defined according to the UN’s definition of living on less than $3 a day — an extremely low threshold needed to monitor and draw attention to the living conditions of the poorest around the world. Read more in our article, The $3 a day International Poverty Line . Global poverty data relies on national household surveys that have differences affecting their comparability across countries or over time. 2 The extreme poverty preliminary estimates (“nowcasts”) for 2024 and 2025 and projections until 2030 are based on research by Lakner et al. (2025). 8 Non-market sources of income, including food grown by subsistence farmers for their own consumption, are taken into account. 3 Surveys are less frequently available in poorer countries and for earlier decades. To produce regional and global poverty estimates, the World Bank collates the closest survey for each country and projects the data forward or backward to the year being estimated. 6 Data is expressed in international-$ at 2021 prices, which means that inflation and differences in living costs across countries are taken into account. 4 Download image The rapid progress seen in many countries shows that an end to poverty is possible Each of the countries shown in the chart achieved large declines in extreme poverty over the last generation. 9 The fact that rapid progress against poverty has been achieved in many places is one of the most important lessons we can learn from the available data on extreme poverty. For those who are not aware of such progress — which is the majority of people — it would be easy to make the mistake of believing that poverty is inevitable and that action to tackle poverty is hence doomed to fail. The huge progress seen in so many places shows that this view is incorrect. What you should know about this data Extreme poverty here is defined according to the UN’s definition of living on less than $3 a day — an extremely low threshold needed to monitor and draw attention to the living conditions of the poorest around the world. Read more in our article, The $3 a day International Poverty Line . Global poverty data relies on national household surveys that have differences affecting their comparability across countries or over time. 2 Non-market sources of income, including food grown by subsistence farmers for their own consumption, are taken into account. 3 Data is expressed in international-$ at 2021 prices, which means that inflation and differences in living costs across countries are taken into account. 4 After 200 years of progress, the fight against global poverty is just beginning Over the past two centuries, the world has made good progress against extreme poverty. But only very recently has poverty fallen at higher poverty lines. Global poverty rates at these higher lines remain very high: Around a quarter — 24% — of the world lives on less than $5 a day. Around half — 52% — of the world lives on less than $10 a day. 81% live on less than $30 a day — a threshold similar to the poverty lines adopted in many of the world’s richest countries. 10 Economic growth has allowed most of the world to leave extreme poverty behind. But by the standards of today’s rich countries, the world remains very poor. If this should change, the world still needs to achieve very substantial economic growth. The history of the end of poverty has just begun The decline of global poverty is one of the most important achievements in history, but the end of poverty is still very far away. How much economic growth is necessary to reduce global poverty substantially? We study the data on today's global inequality to calculate the minimum aggregate growth that is required to reduce global poverty substantially. What you should know about this data The data from 1981 onwards is based on household surveys collated by the World Bank. Earlier figures are from Moatsos (2021), who extends the series backward using historical reconstructions of GDP per capita and inequality data. 11 All data is expressed in international-$ , which means that inflation and differences in living costs across countries are taken into account. 4 The World Bank data is expressed in international-$ at 2021 prices. The World Bank has updated its methodology, having previously used 2017 and 2011 international-$ to measure incomes and set poverty lines. The Moatsos (2021) historical series is based on the previously used World Bank definition of extreme poverty — living on less than $1.90 a day when measured in 2011 international-$. You can read more about the updates to the World Bank’s methodology and how it has affected its estimates of poverty in our articles From $1.90 to $2.15 a day: the updated International Poverty Line and The $3 a day International Poverty Line . The World Bank data relies on national household surveys that have differences affecting their comparability across countries or over time. 2 Such household surveys are less frequently available in poorer countries and for earlier decades. To produce regional and global poverty estimates, the World Bank selects the closest survey for each country and projects the data forward or backward to the year being estimated. 6 Non-market sources of income, including food grown by subsistence farmers for their own consumption, are taken into account. This is also true of the historical data — in producing historical estimates of GDP per capita on which these long-run estimates are based, economic historians include such non-market sources of income, as we discuss in our article How do we know the history of extreme poverty? Download image Explore Data on Poverty More about this data Data source and key definitions The World Bank’s Poverty and Inequality Platform (PIP) is a global database of household surveys. The Bank has taken steps to harmonize definitions and methods across countries and over time. Where is this data sourced from? This data explorer is collated and adapted from the World Bank’s Poverty and Inequality Platform (PIP). About the comparability of household surveys There is no global survey of incomes. To understand how incomes across the world compare, researchers need to rely on available national surveys. Such surveys are partly designed with cross-country comparability in mind, but because they are also designed to reflect each country’s circumstances and priorities at the time of the survey, there are some important differences. Income vs. consumption surveys One of the most important differences is in what is being measured. The survey data included within the World Bank PIP database tends to measure people’s income in richer countries and people’s consumption expenditure in poorer countries. Countries choose the concept that can be better measured and relevant to their context. The two concepts are closely related: the income of a household equals their consumption plus any savings, or minus any borrowing or spending out of savings. One important difference is that, while zero consumption is not a feasible value — people with zero consumption would starve — a zero income is a possible value. For instance, a person in retirement may have a very low, or even zero, income, but a high level of consumption nevertheless. This means that, at the bottom end of the distribution, income and consumption can give quite different pictures of a person’s welfare. Poverty rates tend to be higher when income is used rather than consumption, for the same country and year. The gap between income and consumption is also larger at the top of this distribution. Richer households tend to save a greater share of their income, so their consumption often understates the resources they have. Taken together, one implication is that inequality measured in terms of consumption is generally somewhat lower than the inequality measured in terms of income. In our Poverty Data Explorer , you can choose to view estimates based on only income surveys, only consumption surveys, or both types combined, which offers broader coverage. Other comparability issues There are a number of other ways in which comparability across surveys can be limited. The PIP Methodology Handbook provides a good summary of the comparability and data quality issues affecting this data and how it tries to address them. In collating this survey data, the World Bank takes various steps to harmonize it where possible, but comparability issues remain. These affect comparisons both across countries and within individual countries over time. To help users interpret the data, the World Bank produces a variable that groups surveys within each individual country into more comparable “spells” — periods where data is judged to be more internally consistent. Our Data Explorer allows you to view the data with these breaks in comparability indicated. Global and regional poverty estimates Along with data for individual countries, the World Bank also provides global and regional poverty estimates, which aggregate over the available country data. Surveys are not conducted annually in every country — coverage is generally poorer the further back in time you look, and remains particularly patchy within Sub-Saharan Africa. You can see that in our chart of the number of surveys included in the World Bank data by decade. To produce global and regional aggregate estimates for a given year, the World Bank “lines up” the data by taking the surveys falling closest to that year for each country, and projecting them forward or backward. This lining-up is generally done assuming that household income or expenditure grows in line with the growth rates observed in national accounts data. You can read more about the interpolation methods used by the World Bank in Chapter 5 of the Poverty and Inequality Platform Methodology Handbook. How does the data account for inflation and for differences in the cost of living across countries? To account for inflation and price differences across countries, the World Bank’s data is expressed in constant international dollars (int.-$). International dollars are a hypothetical currency that results from price adjustments across time and place. One international dollar is defined as having the same purchasing power as one US dollar would in the United States in a given base year. This means one int.-$ buys the same quantity of goods and services no matter where or when it is spent. You can read more about this in What are international dollars? . There are many challenges to making such adjustments and they are far from perfect. Angus Deaton ( Deaton, 2010 ) provides a good discussion of the difficulties involved in price adjustments and how this relates to global poverty measurement. But in a world where price differences across countries and over time are large, it is important to attempt to account for these differences as much as possible, and this is what these adjustments do. In June 2025, the World Bank updated its global poverty estimates and now uses international dollars expressed in 2021 prices, updated from 2017 prices. You can read more about this update in our article The $3 a day International Poverty Line . To allow for comparisons with the official data now expressed in international-$ at 2021 prices, the World Bank also continues to release its poverty and inequality data expressed in international-$ at 2017 prices. Absolute vs. relative poverty lines This dataset provides poverty estimates for a range of absolute and relative poverty lines. An absolute poverty line represents a fixed standard of living; a threshold that is held constant across time. Within the World Bank’s poverty data, absolute poverty lines also aim to represent a standard of living that is applied consistently across all countries (by converting local currencies to international-$). The International Poverty Line of $3 per day (in international-$ at 2021 prices) is the best-known absolute poverty line and is used by the World Bank and the UN to measure extreme poverty around the world. In contrast, the value of relative poverty lines rises and falls as average incomes change within a given country. In most cases, these lines are set at a certain fraction of the median income, a common choice being 50% of the median income. Because of this, relative poverty can be considered a metric of inequality—it measures how spread out the bottom half of the income distribution is. The idea behind measuring poverty in relative terms is that a person’s well-being depends not on their own absolute standard of living but on how that standard compares with some reference group, or whether it enables them to participate in the norms and customs of their society. For instance, joining a friend’s birthday celebration without shame might require more resources in a rich society if the norm is to go for an expensive meal or give expensive presents. Our Data Explorer includes three commonly used relative poverty lines: 40%, 50%, and 60% of the median income. Such lines are most commonly used in rich countries, and are the main way poverty is measured by the OECD and the European Union .  More recently, relative poverty measures have come to be applied in a global context. The share of people living below 50% of the median income is, for instance, one of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal indicators . The World Bank also produces estimates of global poverty using a Societal Poverty Line that combines absolute and relative components. When comparing relative poverty rates around the world, however, it is important to keep in mind that — since average incomes are so far apart — relative poverty lines relate to very different standards of living in rich and poor countries. Does the data account for non-market income, such as food grown by subsistence farmers? Many people in poverty today, as in the past, rely on subsistence farming rather than a monetary income gained from selling goods or their labor on the market. To take this into account and make a fair comparison of their living standards, the statisticians who produce these figures estimate the monetary value of their home production and add it to their income or consumption expenditure. Research & Writing November 22, 2021 Extreme poverty: How far have we come, and how far do we still have to go? The world has made immense progress against extreme poverty, but it is still the reality for almost one in ten people worldwide. Max Roser August 11, 2025 $3 a day: A new poverty line has shifted the World Bank’s data on extreme poverty. What changed, and why? In June 2025, the World Bank increased its extreme poverty estimates by 125 million people. This doesn’t mean the world has gotten poorer: it reflects a new, higher International Poverty Line of $3 a day, up from $2.15. Joe Hasell, Bertha Rohenkohl, and Pablo Arriagada December 16, 2024 Beyond income: understanding poverty through the Multidimensional Poverty Index The experience of poverty goes beyond a very low income. What is the Multidimensional Poverty Index, and how does it capture the diverse ways people experience deprivation? Joe Hasell, Pablo Arriagada, and Bertha Rohenkohl Global poverty over the long-run January 11, 2022 The history of the end of poverty has just begun Max Roser February 05, 2019 How do we know the history of extreme poverty? Joe Hasell and Max Roser November 26, 2020 Breaking out of the Malthusian trap: How pandemics allow us to understand why our ancestors were stuck in poverty Max Roser December 14, 2016 The short history of global living conditions and why it matters that we know it Max Roser Poverty & Economic Growth February 22, 2021 The economies that are home to the poorest billions of people need to grow if we want global poverty to decline substantially Max Roser March 15, 2021 How much economic growth is necessary to reduce global poverty substantially? Max Roser March 05, 2021 Global poverty in an unequal world: Who is considered poor in a rich country? And what does this mean for our understanding of global poverty? Max Roser April 08, 2017 What do poor people think about poverty? Max Roser More Articles on Poverty July 12, 2021 Almost three billion people cannot afford a healthy diet Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado February 23, 2017 Homelessness and poverty in rich countries Esteban Ortiz-Ospina September 29, 2017 Historical poverty reductions: more than a story about “free-market capitalism” Esteban Ortiz-Ospina July 06, 2023 OWID Data Collection: Inequality and Poverty Joe Hasell and Pablo Arriagada October 26, 2022 From $1.90 to $2.15 a day: the updated International Poverty Line Joe Hasell and Pablo Arriagada Key Charts on Poverty See all charts on this topic Share of population living in extreme poverty Total population living in extreme poverty by world region Share in poverty relative to different poverty lines Distribution of population between different poverty lines Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021) Share of population living in multidimensional poverty Current estimates Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Current estimates Median income or consumption per day How does extreme monetary poverty compare to multidimensional poverty? Current estimates Number of people living in extreme poverty Poverty: Share of population living on less than $1 a day Poverty: Share of population living on less than $4.20 a day Poverty: Share of population living on less than $8.30 a day Share of population living in extreme poverty 'Cost of basic needs' approach, Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021), Stacked area chart Total population living in extreme poverty by world region with World Bank projections Cereal yield vs. share in extreme poverty Child mortality vs. share in extreme poverty Death rate from indoor air pollution vs. share in extreme poverty Death rate from unsafe water sources vs. share of population living in extreme poverty Distribution of population between different poverty lines fewer thresholds Distribution of population between different poverty lines more thresholds Distribution of population between different poverty lines Expected years of schooling vs. share in extreme poverty Fertility rate vs. share living in extreme poverty GDP per capita World Bank, constant international-$ Hidden Hunger Index vs. share in extreme poverty Income or consumption of the poorest 10% World Bank Income or consumption of the poorest 10% vs. GDP per capita Income or consumption of the poorest 10% vs. mean income Income or consumption of the poorest and richest 10% Income or consumption of the richest 10% World Bank Intensity of multidimensional poverty Current estimates Intensity of multidimensional poverty Harmonized over time estimates Mean income or consumption per day Mean income or consumption per day vs. GDP per capita Mean vs. median income or consumption World Bank Median income or consumption per day vs. GDP per capita Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) Harmonized over time estimates National poverty line vs. GDP per capita By income group National poverty line vs. mean daily income or consumption National poverty line vs. median income or consumption per day Number of income/consumption surveys in the past decade available via the World Bank Number of people living in extreme poverty Stacked area chart Number of people living in extreme poverty by region 'Cost of basic needs' approach, Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021) Number of people living in extreme poverty by region Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021) Poverty gap index at $3 a day Poverty: Share of population living on less than $10 a day Poverty: Share of population living on less than $40 a day Prosperity gap Relative poverty: Share of population below 40% of the median Relative poverty: Share of population below 50% of the median Relative poverty: Share of population below 60% of the median Share in extreme poverty vs. life expectancy Share in extreme poverty vs. poverty gap index Share in extreme poverty: Cost of basic needs approach vs. living on less than $1.90 a day Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021) Share in poverty relative to different poverty lines Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021) Share in poverty vs. educational attainment Share in poverty vs. life expectancy Share living on less than $8.30 a day vs. mean income or consumption Share of children who are underweight vs. share in extreme poverty Share of government consumption in GDP vs. share of population living in extreme poverty Share of gross national income from poverty reduction grants Share of people at risk of falling into poverty if payment for surgical care is required Share of population living below national poverty lines Share of population living in extreme poverty Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021), Stacked area chart Share of population living in extreme poverty 'Cost of basic needs' approach, Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021), Line chart Share of population living in extreme poverty Historical estimates (Moatsos, 2021), Line chart Share of population living in extreme poverty vs. GDP per capita Share of population living in extreme poverty vs. mean income or consumption per day Share of population living in multidimensional poverty Harmonized over time estimates Share of population living in multidimensional poverty: urban vs. rural areas Harmonized over time estimates Share of population living in multidimensional poverty: urban vs. rural areas Current estimates Share of population living with less than $3 and $4.20 per day Share vs. intensity of multidimensional poverty Current estimates The share and number of people living in extreme poverty Total shortfall from extreme poverty Vaccination coverage vs. share in extreme poverty Chart 1 of 76 Endnotes Official definitions of poverty vary across countries and are often not directly comparable due to the different ways in which poverty is measured. For example, some countries measure it using household income, others use consumption, and there are differences in how they account for the size of households. The poverty lines shown here are an approximation of those national definitions. To make comparisons possible, the World Bank built a database of harmonized national poverty lines. For all countries apart from the United States, we take the harmonized poverty line. Harmonized poverty lines are calculated as the international dollar figure, which, when applied to the World Bank’s Poverty and Inequality Platform (PIP) data, yields the same poverty rate as each country’s officially reported rate in a given year (typically around 2021 in the latest 2025 PIP data release). This approach allows us to express the national poverty lines on a common scale, telling us how much someone would need to live on (in international dollars) to be considered poor by the standards of their own country. You can read more about the methodology in Joliffe et al. (2024) and Foster et al. (2025). For the US , Foster and colleagues use the OECD’s published poverty rate — which is measured against a relative poverty line of 50% of the median income. This yields a poverty line of around $44 (measured using 2023 survey data). But this is not the official definition of poverty adopted in the US. We calculated an alternative harmonized figure for the US national poverty using the same method as Jolliffe et al. (2024), but based instead on the official 2023 poverty rate reported by the US Census Bureau . Jolliffe, D., Mahler, D. G., Lakner, C., Atamanov, A., & Tetteh-Baah, S. K. (2024). Poverty and Prices: Assessing the Impact of the 2017 PPPs on the International Poverty Line and Global Poverty. The World Bank Economic Review, lhae035. Available here . Foster, E.M., Jolliffe, D., Ibarra, G.L., Lakner, C., Tetteh Baah, S.K. (2025). Global Poverty Revisited Using 2021 PPPs and New Data on Consumption. Policy Research Working Paper. World Bank, Washington, D.C. Available here . Because there is no global survey of incomes, researchers need to rely on available national surveys. Such surveys are partly designed with cross-country comparability in mind, but because they are also designed to reflect each country’s circumstances and priorities at the time of the survey, there are some important differences. In collating this survey data, the World Bank takes steps to harmonize it where possible, but comparability issues remain. One of the most important differences is in what is being measured. The survey data included within the World Bank PIP database tends to measure people’s income in richer countries and people’s consumption expenditure in poorer countries. Countries choose the concept that can be better measured and relevant to their context. The two concepts are closely related: the income of a household equals their consumption plus any savings, or minus any borrowing or spending out of savings. One important difference is that, while zero consumption is not a feasible value — people with zero consumption would starve — a zero income is a possible value. For instance, a person in retirement may have a very low, or even zero, income, but a high level of consumption nevertheless. This means that, at the bottom end of the distribution, income and consumption can give quite different pictures of a person’s welfare. The gap between income and consumption is also larger at the top of this distribution. Richer households tend to save a greater share of their income, so their consumption often understates the resources they have. Taken together, one implication is that inequality measured in terms of consumption is generally somewhat lower than the inequality measured in terms of income. In our Poverty Data Explorer , you can choose to view estimates based on only income surveys, only consumption surveys, or both types combined, which offers broader coverage. There are a number of other ways in which comparability across surveys can be limited. The PIP Methodology Handbook provides a good summary of the comparability and data quality issues affecting this data and how it tries to address them. In collating this survey data, the World Bank takes various steps to harmonize it where possible, but comparability issues remain. These affect comparisons both across countries and within individual countries over time. To help users interpret changes over time, the World Bank produces a variable that groups surveys within each individual country into more comparable “spells” — periods where data is judged to be more internally consistent. Our Data Explorer allows you to view the data with these breaks in comparability indicated. Many people in poverty today, as in the past, rely on subsistence farming rather than a monetary income gained from selling goods or their labor on the market. To take this into account and make a fair comparison of their living standards, the statisticians who produce these figures estimate the monetary value of their home production and add it to their income or consumption expenditure. International dollars are a hypothetical currency that results from price adjustments across time and place. One international dollar is defined as having the same purchasing power as one US dollar would in the United States in a given base year. This means one int.-$ buys the same quantity of goods and services no matter where or when it is spent. You can read more about this in our article What are international dollars? . ​​According to World Bank estimates, in 1990, there were 2.31 billion people living in extreme poverty. By 2025, that number had fallen to 808 million. The average fall over the 35 years in between is: (2.31 billion – 0.808 billion)/35 = 42.9 million. Dividing by the number of days (35 x 365) gives the average daily fall: (2.31 billion – 0.808 billion)/(35 x 365) = 118,000. (All figures rounded to 3 significant figures). The projections are generally based on the assumption that incomes or expenditures grow in line with the growth rates observed in national accounts data. You can read more about the methods used by the World Bank in Chapter 5 of the Poverty and Inequality Platform Methodology Handbook. The figures are taken from the data reproducibility package for the 2025 World Bank Poverty and Inequality Platform update (Lakner et al., 2025). To generate the poverty projections for 2026 to 2030, World Bank researchers take the last observed distribution of income or consumption expenditure from household surveys and assume that it shifts in line with the projected growth in real GDP per capita from national accounts data. The GDP forecasts come from the World Bank's Macro Poverty Outlook ( April 2025 ) and the IMF's World Economic Outlook (April 2025). The method also assumes that income inequality doesn’t change over time. You can read more about this projection method in the World Bank Poverty, Prosperity, and Planet Report 2024 (Annex 1).  Lakner, C., Foster, E. M., Jolliffe, D., Ibarra, G. L., & Tetteh Baah, S. K. (2025). Reproducibility package for Global Poverty Revisited Using 2021 PPPs And New Data On Consumption . World Bank. These figures combine data from household surveys or extrapolated values up until the year of the data release (2025) using GDP per capita growth estimates and forecasts. Projections for 2026 to 2030 are based on GDP per capita growth projections from the World Bank's Macro Poverty Outlook (April 2025) and IMF's World Economic Outlook (April 2025). Shown are those countries with a decline of more than 30 percentage points over a period of 15 years or more.  There are a number of ways in which comparability across the different household surveys on which this data is based can be limited. These affect comparisons both across countries and within individual countries over time.  The World Bank’s Poverty and Inequality Platform Methodology Handbook provides a good summary of the comparability and data quality issues affecting this data and how it tries to address them. In collating this survey data, the World Bank takes various steps to harmonize it where possible, but comparability issues remain. To help users interpret the data, the World Bank produces a variable that groups surveys within each individual country into more comparable “spells” — periods where data is judged to be more internally consistent. Our Data Explorer allows you to view the data with these breaks in comparability indicated. You can read more about how the International Poverty Line is used to track extreme poverty in our articles From $1.90 to $2.15 a day: the updated International Poverty Line and The $3 a day International Poverty Line . The higher line of $30 a day is broadly consistent with definitions of poverty in rich countries. See our article Global poverty in an unequal world: Who is considered poor in a rich country? And what does this mean for our understanding of global poverty? For details of the methods used to produce the long-run poverty data, see Moatsos, M. (2021). Global extreme poverty: Present and past since 1820. In van Zanden, Rijpma, Malinowski and Mira d’Ercole (eds.) How Was Life? Volume II: New Perspectives on Well-Being and Global Inequality since 1820. Available from the OECD here . Cite this work Our articles and data visualizations rely on work from many different people and organizations. When citing this topic page, please also cite the underlying data sources. This topic page can be cited as: Joe Hasell, Bertha Rohenkohl, Pablo Arriagada, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Max Roser (2022) - “Poverty” Published online at OurWorldinData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/poverty' [Online Resource] BibTeX citation @article{owid-poverty,
    author = {Joe Hasell and Bertha Rohenkohl and Pablo Arriagada and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina and Max Roser},
    title = {Poverty},
    journal = {Our World in Data},
    year = {2022},
    note = {https://ourworldindata.org/poverty}
} Reuse this work freely All visualizations, data, and code produced by Our World in Data are completely open access under the Creative Commons BY license . You have the permission to use, distribute, and reproduce these in any medium, provided the source and authors are credited. The data produced by third parties and made available by Our World in Data is subject to the license terms from the original third-party authors. We will always indicate the original source of the data in our documentation, so you should always check the license of any such third-party data before use and redistribution. All of our charts can be embedded in any site. Our World in Data is free and accessible for everyone. Help us do this work by making a donation. Donate now Our World in Data is a project of Global Change Data Lab , a nonprofit based in the UK (Reg. Charity No. 1186433). Our charts, articles, and data are licensed under CC BY , unless stated otherwise. Tools and software we develop are open source under the MIT license . Third-party materials, including some charts and data, are subject to third-party licenses. See our FAQs for more details. Explore Topics Data Insights Resources Latest Articles SDG Tracker Teaching with OWID About About Us Organization Funding Team Jobs FAQs RSS Feeds Research & Writing Data Insights Follow us Privacy policy Legal disclaimer Grapher license