Floo Powder (object) | Pottermore Wiki | Fandom Sign In Register Pottermore Wiki Explore Main Page Discuss All Pages Community Interactive Maps Recent Blog Posts Pottermore Chapters Philosopher's Stone chapters Chamber of Secrets chapters Prisoner of Azkaban chapters Goblet of Fire chapters Deathly Hallows chapters Half-Blood Prince chapters Order of the Phoenix chapters Items Locations Ollivanders: Makers of Fine Wands since 382 BC Gringotts Wizarding Bank Diagon Alley Buildings Diagon Alley Shops Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry Knockturn Alley Characters Harry Potter Ron Weasley Rowena Ravenclaw Salazar Slytherin Godric Gryffindor Helga Hufflepuff Professor Sinistra Community Recent blog posts Forum Sign In Don't have an account? Register Sign In Menu Explore More History Advertisement Skip to content Pottermore Wiki 1,599 pages Explore Main Page Discuss All Pages Community Interactive Maps Recent Blog Posts Pottermore Chapters Philosopher's Stone chapters Chamber of Secrets chapters Prisoner of Azkaban chapters Goblet of Fire chapters Deathly Hallows chapters Half-Blood Prince chapters Order of the Phoenix chapters Items Locations Ollivanders: Makers of Fine Wands since 382 BC Gringotts Wizarding Bank Diagon Alley Buildings Diagon Alley Shops Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry Knockturn Alley Characters Harry Potter Ron Weasley Rowena Ravenclaw Salazar Slytherin Godric Gryffindor Helga Hufflepuff Professor Sinistra Community Recent blog posts Forum in: Objects , Found Floo Powder (object) Sign in to edit History Purge Talk (0) This article is about the object. For the moment of the same name, see Floo Powder . Floo Powder Found in " Floo Powder " Required? No Can be gifted? Yes Floo Powder is a powder used for traveling with the Floo Network. It is used by throwing a small handful into a lighted fireplace, shouting the name of the destination and stepping into the fire. Contents 1 From the Story 1.1 Discovered in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets 2 Description 3 Location 4 Uses 5 References 6 See also From the Story [ ] “ This glittering powder enables wizards to travel through a network of wizarding fireplaces. A pinch of the powder is thrown into the fire, turning the flames green. The wizard then steps into the fire and calls out the name of their destination, to which they are whirled almost instantly. Travelling by Floo powder is dizzying, and it is all too easy to arrive accidentally in the wrong grate if you don't speak clearly enough. ” Discovered in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets [ ] At Flourish and Blotts , " Floo Powder " [ 1 ] “ Floo powder was invented by Ignatia Wildsmith in the thirteenth century. Its manufacture is strictly controlled. The only licensed producer in Britain is Floo-Pow, a company whose Headquarters is in Diagon Alley, and who never answer their front door. No shortage of Floo powder has ever been reported, nor does anybody know anyone who makes it. Its price has remained constant for one hundred years: two Sickles a scoop. Every wizard household carries a stock of Floo powder, usually conveniently located in a box or vase on the mantelpiece. The precise composition of Floo powder is a closely guarded secret. Those who have tried to ‘make their own’ have been universally unsuccessful. At least once a year, St Mungo’s Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries reports what they call a ‘Faux Floo’ injury – in other words, somebody has thrown a homemade powder onto a fire and suffered the consequences. As irate Healer and St Mungo’s spokeswizard, Rutherford Poke, said in 2010: ‘It’s two Sickles a scoop, people, so stop being cheap, stop throwing powdered Runespoor fangs on the fire and stop blowing yourselves out of the chimney! If one more wizard comes in here with a burned backside, I swear I won’t treat him. It’s two Sickles a scoop!’ ” Description [ ] “ When travelling by Floo powder it is important that you speak clearly, take care to get out at the right grate, keep your elbows tucked in, shut your eyes, don’t fidget and don’t panic. ” Location [ ] " Floo Powder " It is in the pot on the Weasleys' fireplace next to the books. A handful of the powder has to be dragged into the fire in order to open the lock to the next moment. Doing this successfully will automatically add the Floo Powder to the Trunk. Uses [ ] The Floo Powder is used to travel to Diagon Alley in Chapter 4 of Chamber of Secrets. It has no other known uses. References [ ] ↑ Floo Powder (as of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , Chapter 4) on Pottermore See also [ ] Floo Powder on the Harry Potter Wiki Categories Categories : Objects Found Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted. More Fandoms Fantasy Harry Potter Advertisement Explore properties Fandom Fanatical GameSpot Metacritic TV Guide Honest Entertainment Follow Us Overview What is Fandom? About Careers Press Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Digital Services Act Global Sitemap Local Sitemap Community Community Central Support Help Advertise Media Kit Contact Fandom Apps Take your favorite fandoms with you and never miss a beat. Pottermore Wiki is a Fandom Games Community. View Mobile Site