Can Coffee Really Stunt Your Growth? - Harvard Health Harvard Health Publishing Harvard Health Publishing HarvardHealthOnline+ Search Customer Service Content Licensing About Us Log In Open mobile menu Free HealthBeat Signup Shop Subscriptions Special Health Reports Online Courses Pay Subscription Bill Common Conditions Staying Healthy Resources Blog COVID-19 Updates Close menu HarvardHealthOnline+ Main Content Common Conditions Staying Healthy Resources Blog Helpful Links Customer Service About Us Content Licensing Free Healthbeat Signup Subscriptions Special Health Reports Online Courses Pay Subscription Bill Search Search Close Recent Articles How does prostate cancer treatment affect mental health? 5 timeless habits for better health What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? Is your breakfast cereal healthy? When pain signals an emergency: Symptoms you should never ignore Does exercise give you energy? Acupuncture for pain relief: How it works and what to expect How to avoid jet lag: Tips for staying alert when you travel Biofeedback therapy: How it works and how it can help relieve pain Best vitamins and minerals for energy / Can Coffee Really Stunt Your Growth? Few foods or drinks have been as well studied as coffee. Research has looked at coffee's possible connection to cancer, infertility, heart disease and a host of other problems (more on some of these later). But, did you ever hear that coffee might stunt your growth? Apparently, it's a common belief. Separating Truth from Fiction There is no scientifically valid evidence to suggest that coffee can stunt a person's growth. This idea may have come from the misconception that coffee causes osteoporosis (a condition that may be associated with loss of height). But blaming coffee for height loss due to osteoporosis is faulty reasoning for at least two reasons: Coffee does not cause osteoporosis. Osteoporosis does not routinely make you short. The other problem with the "coffee stunts your growth" theory is that most growth occurs well before most people are drinking coffee regularly. By the time we're in our teens, most people have almost reached their full height. For girls, this is usually by age 15 to 17; for boys, it's a bit later. You can't "undo" bone growth once it's complete. Decades ago, studies reported that coffee drinkers might have an increased risk of osteoporosis. It was suggested that: Caffeine can increase the body's elimination of calcium. Lack of calcium can contribute to osteoporosis. Naturally, this attracted lots of attention and concern. After all, there are millions of coffee drinkers, so presumably all of them could be at risk. But the effect of caffeine on calcium excretion is small. And the link between coffee consumption and osteoporosis was never confirmed. In fact, when the studies suggesting a link were analyzed, it turned out that people who drank more coffee also drank less milk and other calcium-containing beverages. So it was probably the dietary intake of calcium and vitamin D among coffee drinkers, not the coffee, that increased the risk of osteoporosis. Causes of Height Loss Osteoporosis with compression fractures can reduce an adult's height. But you can also lose height without osteoporosis. The discs above and below most of the spinal bones (vertebrae) contain water. They lose water with age, so they can degenerate and compress a bit. If enough discs are affected, you can lose a measureable amount of height over time. Curvature of the spine (scoliosis) or bending of the spine forward (kyphosis) can also lead to height loss. The most common causes of scoliosis and kyphosis include osteoporosis (in adults) and developmental abnormalities (in kids). For anyone concerned about the effect of coffee consumption on bone health, getting more calcium and vitamin D through diet (or supplements) could readily address this. And while it's true that people who have osteoporosis of the spine can lose height (and often have curved spines), it's the fractures, not the osteoporosis itself, that lead to height loss. The Risks and Benefits of Coffee Many studies have failed to identify serious medical risks associated with coffee drinking. Coffee can cause insomnia, a jittery feeling and a slight (and temporary) elevation in blood pressure in some people. Excessive coffee consumption (six or more cups per day) has been associated with reduced fertility and miscarriage (although definitive studies are not available). In addition, caffeine withdrawal is a common cause of headaches; higher intake can trigger migraine headaches; and it can worsen heartburn due to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). But most coffee drinkers have no bothersome side effects. And many studies have "cleared" coffee as a cause of serious disease, including cancer and heart disease. In fact, research has linked coffee consumption to several health benefits, including a reduced risk of: Type 2 diabetes Abnormal heart rhythms Stroke Parkinson's disease Alzheimer's disease Liver disease Certain cancers (especially liver cancer) Gout Caffeine can also briefly enhance athletic performance and promote weight loss. (By the way, many competitive sports ban excessive caffeine intake by athletes.) Some of these potential benefits may not just be related to caffeine. For example, maybe coffee drinkers have healthier lifestyles than non-coffee drinkers. If true, those lifestyle differences, not the coffee, could account for the lower risk of certain diseases. Just as the "link" between coffee and osteoporosis turned out to have another explanation, these potential health benefits could turn out to be unrelated to coffee. The Bottom Line Whether or not coffee turns out to have significant health benefits, this popular beverage doesn't stunt your growth. Your height is largely determined by the height of your parents and the quality of your diet and overall health while growing. If you eat a balanced diet and take measures to avoid osteoporosis, you're likely to achieve the maximum height "allowed" by your genes. And, sorry: Just as drinking coffee won't make you shorter, avoiding it won't make you any taller. Image: Laborer/Getty Images Share Share this page to Facebook Share this page to X Share this page via Email Copy this page to clipboard Print This Page Click to Print Disclaimer: As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles. No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician. Recent Articles How does prostate cancer treatment affect mental health? 5 timeless habits for better health What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? Is your breakfast cereal healthy? When pain signals an emergency: Symptoms you should never ignore Does exercise give you energy? Acupuncture for pain relief: How it works and what to expect How to avoid jet lag: Tips for staying alert when you travel Biofeedback therapy: How it works and how it can help relieve pain Best vitamins and minerals for energy / Free Healthbeat Signup Get the latest in health news delivered to your inbox! Sign Up Footer Harvard Health Publishing Facebook X (formerly known as Twitter) Linkedin YouTube My Account Customer Service Log in Order Now Online Learning Courses Digital Subscriptions Special Health Reports Print Subscriptions More About Us Permissions Content Licensing Topics Trademark Notice © 2025 Harvard Health Publishing® of The President and Fellows of Harvard College Do not sell my personal information | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use Scroll To Top Close Thanks for visiting. Don't miss your FREE gift. 25 Gut Health Hacks is yours absolutely FREE when you sign up to receive health information from Harvard Medical School. Sign up to get tips for living a healthy lifestyle, with ways to lessen digestion problems…keep inflammation under control…learn simple exercises to improve your balance …understand your options for cataract treatment…all delivered to your email box FREE. I want to get healthier This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Close Health Alerts from Harvard Medical School And a FREE copy of the new report 25 Gut Health Hacks ! Sign up to receive HealthBeat emails from Harvard Health Publishing and get helpful tips and guidance for ways to lessen digestion problems… keep inflammation under control… learn simple exercises to improve your balance… understand your options for cataract treatment… all delivered to your email inbox FREE. PLUS, you'll get the latest news on medical advances and breakthroughs from Harvard Medical School experts, and special offers on content from Harvard Health Publishing. I want to get healthier This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Close Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School. Plus, get a FREE copy of 25 Gut Health Hacks . Sign me up Close Stay on top of latest health news from Harvard Medical School. Plus, get a FREE copy of 25 Gut Health Hacks . Sign me up This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.