Superhabitable planets: Worlds more habitable than Earth | Space Skip to main content Open menu Space Sign up to our newsletter Newsletter RSS Sign in View Profile Sign out Search Search Space Black Friday Space Exploration Launches & Spacecraft Private spaceflight Human spaceflight SpaceX Blue Origin Virgin Galactic United Launch Alliance Search for Life Exoplanets SETI Aliens Missions International Space Station Space Shuttle Apollo Artemis Voyager Asteroid & Comet Missions Mars rovers New Horizons Parker Solar Probe Satellites Astronomy Solar System The Sun Asteroids Mars Comets Mercury Jupiter Saturn Pluto Venus Dwarf Planets Neptune Uranus The Moon Moon Phases The Earth Live 4K video from space Climate Change Weather The Universe Stars Black Holes Dark Universe Galaxies Deep Space James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Stargazing Skywatching Kit Telescopes Cameras Astrophotography Eclipses Lunar Eclipses Solar Eclipses Entertainment Space Movies & Shows Star Trek Star Wars Space Games Space Toys & Lego Space Books Tech & Science Technology Drones Aerospace Science Particle Physics Astrophysics Videos More Subscribe to our Newsletters About Us Web Notifications home Black Friday Space Exploration View Space Exploration Launches & Spacecraft View Launches & Spacecraft Private spaceflight Human spaceflight SpaceX Blue Origin Virgin Galactic United Launch Alliance Search for Life View Search for Life Exoplanets SETI Aliens Missions View Missions International Space Station Space Shuttle Apollo Artemis Voyager Asteroid & Comet Missions Mars rovers New Horizons Parker Solar Probe Satellites Astronomy View Astronomy Solar System View Solar System The Sun Asteroids Mars Comets Mercury Jupiter Saturn Pluto Venus Dwarf Planets Neptune Uranus The Moon View The Moon Moon Phases The Earth View The Earth Live 4K video from space Climate Change Weather The Universe View The Universe Stars Black Holes Dark Universe Galaxies Deep Space View Deep Space James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Stargazing View Stargazing Skywatching Kit View Skywatching Kit Telescopes Cameras Astrophotography Eclipses View Eclipses Lunar Eclipses Solar Eclipses Entertainment View Entertainment Space Movies & Shows View Space Movies & Shows Star Trek Star Wars Space Games Space Toys & Lego Space Books Tech & Science Technology View Technology Drones Aerospace Science View Science Particle Physics Astrophysics Videos More Subscribe to our Newsletters About Us Web Notifications Jump to: The search Some contenders Additional resources Don't miss these Skywatching Kit Best telescopes for seeing planets in 2025 Skywatching Kit Best smart binoculars 2025: Learn, share and be guided around the night sky Skywatching Kit Best smart telescopes Black Friday 2025: Observe stars, galaxies and nebulas with ease Skywatching Kit Best telescopes for beginners Black Friday 2025: The best scopes for budding new astronomers Skywatching Kit Best telescopes for deep space 2025: View the universe in breathtaking detail Skywatching Kit Best telescopes ahead of Black Friday 2025: Observe stars, galaxies and nebulas Skywatching Kit Best star projectors 2025: The top projectors and planetariums ahead of Black Friday 2025 Skywatching Kit Best budget binoculars 2025 — good quality, cheaper binos Skywatching Kit Best budget telescopes under $500 we recommend in 2025 Skywatching Kit Best binoculars 2025 — best overall models for stargazing, wildlife and general use ahead of Black Friday Skywatching Kit Best telescopes for kids Black Friday 2025: The best child-friendly scopes Space Toys & Lego Best lightsabers 2025: Toys, replicas, and props Technology Best star projectors under $100: Black Friday 2025 Skywatching Kit Best star projectors for kids: Night-lights and ambient toys to soothe young space fans Skywatching Kit Best monoculars in 2025 — lighter, smaller and cheaper than binoculars Trending NASA Comet 3I/ATLAS Images Revealed! ☄️ Next Full Moon Live 4K Sen video from space! Aurora Forecast Space Calendar Night sky tonight! Best Binoculars Lego Star Wars deals Best Drones Solar System Planets Best Telescopes Best Star Projectors Astronomy Exoplanets Superhabitable planets: Alien worlds that may be more habitable than Earth References By Charles Q. Choi Contributions from Vicky Stein published 24 February 2022 Bigger, better, more suited for biology: let's not overlook superhabitable planets with potential. When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works . An artist's depiction of a rocky, Earth-size exoplanet. We haven't found any planets exactly as habitable as Earth, but some planets might be even better for life than ours: superhabitable worlds. (Image credit: NASA Ames/SETI Institute/JPL-Caltech) Jump to: The search Some contenders Additional resources A superhabitable planet is a world that might have an even better chance at hosting life than our own home, Earth. Because Earth is the only known inhabited planet and its life depends on liquid water, efforts to identify exoplanets that could host life focus on Earth-like worlds. But some researchers think there are other types of planets that could offer conditions for life as good as — or even better than — Earth . In fact, some scientists argue that focusing only on Earth-like worlds might be too "anthropocentric and geocentric," blinding us to the possibilities of exobiology. "We are so over-focused on finding a mirror image of Earth that we may overlook a planet that is even more well-suited for life," Dirk Schulze-Makuch, an astrobiologist at Washington State University and the Technical University of Berlin, told Space.com. Best picks for you Best telescopes for seeing planets in 2025 Best smart binoculars 2025: Learn, share and be guided around the night sky Best smart telescopes Black Friday 2025: Observe stars, galaxies and nebulas with ease How do scientists look for superhabitable planets? To search for potentially superhabitable exoplanets, Schulze-Makuch and his team investigated the Kepler Object of Interest Exoplanet Archive, focusing on 4,500 planetary systems that likely possessed rocky planets within their stars ' habitable zones, where liquid water can persist. The researchers published their findings in a 2020 paper in the journal Astrobiology . In addition to looking at planetary systems with yellow dwarf stars like our sun , the scientists also looked at orange dwarf stars, which are cooler, dimmer and less massive than our sun. "Our sun is actually not the best kind of star for hosting a planet with lots of life on it," Schulze-Makuch told Space.com. Orange dwarf stars are about 50% more common than yellow dwarfs in the Milky Way . Whereas our sun has a lifetime estimated at less than 10 billion years, orange dwarfs have lifetimes of 20 billion to 70 billion years. Since complex life took about 3.5 billion years to appear on Earth, the longer lifetimes of orange dwarf stars could give planets within their habitable zones more time to develop life and accrue biodiversity. Get the Space.com Newsletter Breaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more! Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. Earth is about 4.5 billion years old, so the researchers speculated the sweet spot for life would be a planet between 5 billion to 8 billion years old. The size and mass of a planet can also influence how well it can support life, the researchers wrote. A rocky planet that is larger than Earth would have more habitable surface area, and potentially a thicker, more stable atmosphere. A planet with about 1.5 times Earth's mass would likely retain its interior heat longer, which in turn would help keep its core molten and its protective magnetic field active for a greater timespan in which life might have the chance to arise and evolve. Worlds that are slightly warmer than Earth by about 8 degrees Fahrenheit (5 degrees Celsius) might be superhabitable, since they could have larger tropical zones which on Earth foster more biodiversity. However, warmer planets might also need more moisture, since greater heat could expand deserts. Don't miss these Best telescopes for seeing planets in 2025 Best smart binoculars 2025: Learn, share and be guided around the night sky Best smart telescopes Black Friday 2025: Observe stars, galaxies and nebulas with ease In addition, planets with the same amount of land area as Earth but broken up into smaller continents might be more habitable. When continents become particularly large (such as Earth's past continent Gondwana, about 500 million years ago), their centers are far from oceans, often rendering the interiors of large continents vast, inhospitable deserts. Moreover, Earth's shallow waters have a greater biodiversity than its deep oceans, so scientists speculate that planets with shallower waters could support more life. What are some superhabitable planets? All in all, Schulze-Makuch and team identified 24 potentially superhabitable planets. None of these worlds met all the criteria the researchers drew up for superhabitable planets, but one did meet at least two — KOI 5715.01. KOI (Kepler Object of Interest) 5725.01 is a planet about 5.5 billion years old and 1.8 to 2.4 times Earth's diameter orbiting an orange dwarf about 2,965 light-years away. It might have an average surface temperature about 4.3 degrees F (2.4 degrees C) cooler than that of Earth, but if it has more greenhouse gases than Earth to trap heat, it might be superhabitable, the researchers wrote. Schulze-Makuch's own favorite potentially superhabitable world from these 24 was KOI 5554.01. This planet is about 6.5 billion years old, with a diameter 0.72 to 1.29 times that of Earth, orbiting a yellow dwarf about 700 light-years from Earth. "I really liked the average surface temperature — about 27 degrees C [80 degrees F]," Schulze-Makuch said. "And it's probably about Earth's size, and a little bit older than Earth." All 24 of these potentially superhabitable planets are more than 100 light-years from Earth. This makes them too far for NASA's Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) spacecraft to capture high-quality images from to learn more about them. Still, Schulze-Makuch noted that future spacecraft, such as the newly launched James Webb Space Telescope , NASA's LUVOIR space observatory mission concept and the European Space Agency's PLATO space telescope, could shed light on these worlds. "We caution that while we search for superhabitable planets, that doesn't mean that they necessarily contain life," Schulze-Makuch said. "A planet can be habitable or superhabitable but uninhabited." Additional resources and reading If you're thrilled by the idea of exoplanets, poke around the NASA Exoplanet Archive yourself! If you want to read more about how different and bizarre other planets might be, dive in to astronomer Michael Summers and physicist James Trefil's 2017 book " Exoplanets: Diamond Worlds, Super Earths, Pulsar Planets, and the New Search for Life beyond Our Solar System ." And for anyone looking to dream about living on another world, get lost in this TED playlist about becoming — and thriving as — an extraterrestrial. Bibliography Brennan, Pat. "The Habitable Zone | The Search For Life." Exoplanet Exploration: Planets Beyond our Solar System, April 2, 2021. https://exoplanets.nasa.gov/search-for-life/habitable-zone . Schulze-Makuch, Dirk, René Heller, and Edward Guinan. "In Search for a Planet Better than Earth: Top Contenders for a Superhabitable World." Astrobiology 20, no. 12 (December 1, 2020): 1394–1404. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2019.2161 . Charles Q. Choi Social Links Navigation Contributing Writer Charles Q. Choi is a contributing writer for Space.com and Live Science. He covers all things human origins and astronomy as well as physics, animals and general science topics. Charles has a Master of Arts degree from the University of Missouri-Columbia, School of Journalism and a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of South Florida. Charles has visited every continent on Earth, drinking rancid yak butter tea in Lhasa, snorkeling with sea lions in the Galapagos and even climbing an iceberg in Antarctica. Visit him at http://www.sciwriter.us With contributions from Vicky Stein Contributing Writer Back To Top Deals not to miss Best telescopes for seeing planets in 2025 Best smart binoculars 2025: Learn, share and be guided around the night sky Best smart telescopes Black Friday 2025: Observe stars, galaxies and nebulas with ease Best telescopes for beginners Black Friday 2025: The best scopes for budding new astronomers Best telescopes for deep space 2025: View the universe in breathtaking detail Best telescopes ahead of Black Friday 2025: Observe stars, galaxies and nebulas Latest in Exoplanets Could alien life be found in the clouds of an exoplanet? Aging stars destroy their planets more often than we thought: What does this mean for Earth? Scientists use James Webb Space Telescope to make 1st 3D map of exoplanet — and it's so hot, it rips apart water Scientists discover 3 Earth-size exoplanets that may have double sunsets — like Tatooine in Star Wars Super-Earth less than 20 light-years away is an exciting lead in the search for life For the 1st time, scientists discovered 'heavy water' in a disk forming exoplanets Latest in References Denis Villeneuve's sci-fi movies ranked, worst to best Cosmic horror: 7 of science fiction's most terrifying alien races Best sci-fi strategy games, ranked Become the scary alien this Halloween with these 5 reverse space horror games Every 'Star Wars: Visions Volume 3' episode, ranked from worst to best 'Supergirl' at 10: The Arrowverse TV show laid the blueprint for James Gunn's DC Universe MORE FROM SPACE... 1 Earth and Theia smashed to birth the moon, but did they first start out as close neighbors? 2 AI helps build the most detailed Milky Way simulation ever, mapping 100 billion stars 3 Spot Uranus shining at its brightest this year — here's what to expect on Nov. 21 4 Nikon Monarch M7 8x42 binocular review 5 Watch SpaceX launch more than 100 satellites to orbit today on Transporter 15 rideshare mission Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site . Add as a preferred source on Google About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Advertise with us Web notifications Careers ©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. Close Please login or signup to comment Please wait... Login Sign Up