Coma - Etymology, Origin & Meaning Search Log in Columns Forum Apps Premium Log in Advertisement Remove Ads Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads. Origin and history of coma coma (n.1) "state of prolonged unconsciousness," 1640s, from Latinized form of Greek kōma (genitive kōmatos ) "deep sleep," which is of uncertain origin. A term for "coma" in Middle English was false sleep (late 14c.). Related: Comal . also from 1640s coma (n.2) "nebulous, hair-like envelope surrounding the head of a comet," 1765, from Latin coma , from Greek komē "hair of the head," which is of unknown origin. Earlier in English as a botanical term for a tuft of hairs (1660s). For the constellation Coma Berenices , see Berenice . Related: Comal . also from 1765 Entries linking to coma Berenice fem. proper name, from Latin Berenice , from Macedonian Greek Berenikē (classical Greek Pherenikē ), literally "bringer of victory," from pherein "to bring" (from PIE root *bher- (1) "to carry") + nikē "victory" (see Nike ). The constellation Berenice's Hair ( Coma Berenices ) is from the story of the pilfered amber locks of the wife of Ptolemy Euergetes, king of Egypt, c. 248 B.C.E., which the queen cut off as an offering to Venus. The constellation features a dim but visible star cluster; Ptolemy (the astronomer) regarded it as the tuft of fur at the end of Leo's tail, but German cartographer Caspar Vopel put it on his 1536 globe as Berenice's Hair, and it endured. Berenice's Hair is also sometimes incorrectly given as an old name of the star Canopus, based on Holland's mistranslation of Pliny in 1601. comatose (adj.) 1755, "affected with coma, morbidly drowsy or lethargic," from Latinized form of Greek komat- , combining form of koma (genitive komatos ; see coma (n.1)) + -ose (1). The English word is perhaps immediately from French comateux . Transferred sense of "lethargic" is from 1828. Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads. Trends of coma adapted from books.google.com/ngrams/ with a 7-year moving average; ngrams are probably unreliable. More to explore trance insensible condition, state of insensibility to mundane things," from Old French transe "fear of coming evil," originally "coma... cloud Old English clud "mass of rock, hill," related to clod. The modern sense "rain-cloud, mass of evaporated water visible and suspended in the sky" is a metaphoric extension that begins to appear c. 1300 in southern texts, based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock masses. The u comet "one of a class of celestial bodies which move about the sun in great, elliptical orbits," c. 1200, from Old French comete (12c., Modern French comète), from Latin cometa, from Greek (aster) komētēs, literally "long-haired (star)," from komē "hair of the head" (compare koman "let tuft "bunch of soft and flexible things fixed at the base with the upper ends loose," late 14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French touffe "tuft of hair" (14c.), which is either from Late Latin tufa "a kind of crest on a helmet" (also found in Late Greek toupha), or from a G Iowa organized as a U.S. territory 1838; admitted as a state 1846, named for the river, ultimately from the name of the native people, of the Chiwere branch of the Siouan family; said to be from Dakota ayuxba "sleepy ones," or from an Algonquian language (Bright cites Miami/Illinois / number c. 1300, "sum, aggregate of a collection," from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly from Latin numerus "a number, quantity," from PIE root *nem- "assign, allot; take." The meaning "written symbol or figure of arithmetic value" is from late 14c. The meaning "singl spick-and-span also spic-and-span, "very neat, clean, and trim," 1660s, from spick-and-span-new "new and fresh" (1570s), literally "new as a recently made spike and wood-chip." It seems to be an elaboration, with spick "nail" (see spike (n.1)), of older span-new "very new," in reference to some Injun 1812 (from 1683 as Ingin), a spelling representing the early American English colloquial pronunciation of Indian (q.v.). Honest Injun as an asseveration of truthfuless is first recorded 1868, from the notion of assurance extracted from Indians of their lack of duplicity in a part sedulous "diligent in application or pursuit of an object," 1530s, from Latin sedulus "attentive, painstaking, diligent, busy, zealous," probably from sedulo (adv.) "sincerely, diligently," from sedolo "without deception or guile," from se- "without, apart" (see se-) + dolo, ablative of d ghetto 1610s, "part of a city in which Jews are compelled to live," especially in Italy, from Italian ghetto "part of a city to which Jews are restricted," of unknown origin. The various theories trace it to: Yiddish get "deed of separation;" a special use of Venetian getto "foundry" (t Share coma ‘ cite ’ Page URL : https://www.etymonline.com/word/coma Copy HTML Link : <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/coma">Etymology of coma by etymonline</a> Copy APA Style : Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of coma. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved November 23, 2025, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/coma Copy Chicago Style : Harper Douglas, "Etymology of coma," Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed November 23, 2025, https://www.etymonline.com/word/coma. Copy MLA Style : Harper, Douglas. "Etymology of coma." Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/coma. Accessed 23 November, 2025. Copy IEEE Style : D. Harper. "Etymology of coma." Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/coma (accessed November 23, 2025). Copy Remove Ads Advertisement Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads. Trending Dictionary entries near coma Columbus column columnar columnist com- coma Comanche comatose comb combat combatant Advertisement Close Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads. Want to remove ads? Log in to see fewer ads, and become a Premium Member to remove all ads. Close A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Quick and reliable accounts of the origin and history of English words. Scholarly, yet simple. About Who Did This Sources Introduction Links Support Premium Patreon Donate with PayPal Merch Apps Get Chrome Extension Get iOS App Get Android App Dark Auto Light Terms of Services Privacy Policy English (English) © 2001 - 2025 Douglas Harper