Halloween Laws | USA and UK | University of Law Menu Study Study with us Undergraduate Courses Postgraduate Courses SQE Courses Online Courses Undergraduate Fees and Funding Postgraduate Fees and Funding Scholarships and Bursaries Study Modes Professional Legal Training Apprenticeships Higher Rights Assessment Continuing Your Studies Go to Study Open Days Law and so much more Discover more about our Business School Discover our Psychology courses Locations Campuses Birmingham Bristol Leeds London Manchester Nottingham ULaw Online Hong Kong View all locations ULaw@ GISMA Business School Berlin Newcastle University Oxford Brookes University Royal Holloway The University of Europe for Applied Sciences (UE) University of Chester University of East Anglia University of Exeter University of Hull University of Liverpool University of Reading University of Sheffield University of Southampton Employability Careers and Employability Support for Students Support for Alumni Support for Employers Our Employment Promise Go to Employability Try our new Career Finder tool. Find your career Students Student Services Student Support Financial Support Accommodation International Students Student Life Chat to a Current Student Graduation Open Days Go to Students Moving to a new country can be daunting. We make sure you feel welcome. International support Resources Our Blog Information for Parents and Guardians Podcasts Media Centre Prospectus Schools and Colleges Tech Research Academy Quality of Teaching Verdict Magazine Go to Resources Try our new career pathway selector . Find your career About Alumni Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Governance Harassment and Sexual Misconduct History and Heritage Job Vacancies Media Centre Our Advisory Boards Pedagogy With Purpose Sustainability Go to About Understanding the SQE and what it means for me. Discover more More Login Personal Login Professional Development Login ELITE University E-Mail +44 (0)1483 216 000 Talk to us +44 (0)1483 216 000 Order Prospectus Open Days Close Search Milly Dowler killer Levi Bellfield is a “coward” and a skilled liar, says prosecutor Brian Altman KC. Find out more blog Halloween Laws 6 mins read The UK is used to reports of teenagers being banned from buying eggs and the occasional creepy clown story hitting the headlines around the Halloween season. Apart from laws to protect residents from antisocial behaviour, the UK doesn’t legally restrict festivities. However, the same can’t be said for the rest of the world. To celebrate Halloween, we take a look at the spooky and Halloween related laws across the world, including some favourites from our students. By Editorial Team . Published 30 October 2024. Originally published 24 October 2018. No Halloween masks In Dublin, Georgia, you can’t go out in public wearing a mask if you are under the age of 16 and Belleville, Illinois has the same rule for anyone under 12 years old. There have been laws in New York prohibiting the wearing of masks since the 1800s and in Walnut Creek, California you can’t wear a mask in public without a license from the sheriff. Don’t dress like a nun or a priest If you live in the American state of Alabama you can’t dress like a priest on Halloween or any other day. According to Alabama law, you may be arrested or fined if you dress up as a priest, rabbi, pastor, or any other member of the clergy of any religion. The state code is clear ‘Whoever, being in a public place, fraudulently pretends by garb or outward array to be a minister of any religion, or nun, priest, rabbi or another member of the clergy, is guilty of a misdemeanour and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or confinement in the county jail for not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.’ No taxis for the dead Under London byelaws, which ensure that ease of travel and safety on the transport system: “It’s illegal for any cab in the City of London to transport rabid dogs or corpses”. This was to try and prevent disease in London spreading through transport. This act wasn’t ever repealed so is still technically legislation to this day. Submitted by Teagan Williams, ULaw Online Illegal clown costumes A few years back, there were numerous reports of clowns terrorising people in the French village of Vendragues. In response, authorities made it illegal to dress up as a clown on Halloween and the entire month of November for anyone 13 and older. People wanting to dress up as clowns for “fairs or other public festivities” need permission from the local authorities. After a spate of scary clowns attacking people in 2017, the state police in Connecticut announced that wearing a clown costume for the purpose of intimidation would result in criminal penalties. The UK also suffered from several clown attacks leading to Bedfordshire Police announcing “We will not tolerate anyone inflicting harm on others over Halloween, whether that is by intimidating and threatening them, or causing criminal damage. This behaviour will be taken seriously, and you do risk a criminal record.” No corsets for women Women are not allowed to wear corsets in Merryville, Missouri. This is not a Halloween specific law, which made us wonder what happened to make it a rule. After a bit of research, we found it was because "the privilege of admiring the curvaceous, unencumbered body of a young woman should not be denied to the normal, red-blooded American male." A quote that is possibly creepier than any Halloween costume. Who you gonna call, Mr Speaker? Please try not to die in the Houses of Parliaments this Halloween. Under the Coroners Act 1887, dying is illegal in the houses of parliament: "Anyone whose body is lying 'within the limits of any of the Queen's palaces; or within the limits of any other house where Her Majesty is then residing" (DNA, Nov 7, 2007). Due to the fact that parliament is classed as a royal palace, the convention arises that no parliamentarian dies until they are in an ambulance. It looks like no ghosts will be in Parliament to haunt lawmakers this year at least. Submitted by Keylee Ashman, ULaw Online student No trick-or-treating In the town of Bellville, Missouri, you can’t ask for candy on Halloween if you have passed the eighth grade or the age of an eighth grader (usually between 13-14 years old), enforcing the opinion that trick-or-treating is for children only. No funny moustaches in church Heading back to Alabama, you can’t wear a moustache when you are attending church on Halloween in Alabama if it’s funny enough to make people laugh. This law prohibits fake facial hair. Make sure you avoid wearing a moustachioed costume to church on Halloween. The vile high club Witches in Swaziland must fly below 150 metres on their broomsticks. If they go above that height they will be arrested and fined 500,000 Rand (£35k) according to the Civil Aviation Authority. The statute was made in 2013 after the arrest of a private investigator who was caught using a toy helicopter which had a video camera on board, and also applies to kites. The law exists to protect the country’s airspace and because the people of Swaziland strongly believe in witchcraft and black magic. Submitted by Danika Hill, London Bloomsbury campus No Halloween on a Sunday In Rehoboth, Delaware it’s illegal to celebrate Halloween on Halloween day if October 31 falls on Sunday. The coastal town has prohibited celebrating the occasion on Sundays, meaning all festivities must take place on October 30. Further restrictions limit any trick-or-treating to be carried out between the hours of 6-8 PM. Break the law and you could be fined up to $150. Say no to silly string The use, sale, possession or even distribution of silly string is prohibited in Hollywood, California from 12:00 AM on October 31 until 12:00 PM on November 1. You could be fined up to $1000 for just holding the can. Entry barred for costume wearers Private companies or shops in California can bar you from entering if you are wearing a costume. This is a year-round rule but has more impact at Halloween than any other time of the year. Banning Halloween The country of Jordan has made Halloween and its celebrations illegal. You can’t celebrate or attend Halloween celebrations. In 2015, the U.S Embassy in Jordan warned: "U.S. citizens should expect police reaction, including arrests, at any public Halloween-themed event. The U.S. Embassy advises that U.S. citizens travelling from their home to a Halloween party, or vice versa, cover up their costumes while in public or in a car." If you’re interested in making a difference through a career in law, find out how our undergraduate and postgraduate courses can help you make those first steps towards your aspirations. resources Our Recent Blogs blog What is case law? 21 November 2025 blog Student Snapshot - Gabriella Matthews 17 November 2025 blog What is social engineering? 13 November 2025 View our blog Social Instagram YouTube Facebook Linkedin TikTok Quick links Departmental Contacts Website Terms and Conditions Student Terms and Conditions Legal Advice for the Public University Policies Our Strategic Plan Financial Statements Accessibility Statement Privacy Notice Antisemitism Statement Modern Slavery Statement Room Hire Job Vacancies Contact UK [email protected] 0800 289 997 International [email protected] +44 (0) 1483 216 000 © 2025 The University of Law . All rights reserved. Cookie Settings ×