Coffee and longevity – debate continues Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About GLP-1 Agonists News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge eBooks Posters Podcasts Newsletters Health & Personal Care Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Breastfeeding Cold, Flu & Cough Dermatology Diabetes Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease Lung Cancer Mental Health Parkinson's Disease Pregnancy Sleep Urology View Health A-Z × Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Eating Disorders Diet & Nutrition Eye Health Artificial Intelligence Gastrointestinal Health Allergies Heart Disease Alzheimer's & Dementia Lung Cancer Arthritis & Rheumatology Mental Health Breast Cancer Parkinson's Disease Breastfeeding Pregnancy Cold, Flu & Cough Sleep Dermatology Urology Diabetes View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Posters Podcasts Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge eBooks Posters Podcasts Newsletters Health & Personal Care Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Posters Podcasts Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Coffee and longevity – debate continues Download PDF Copy By Dr. Ananya Mandal, MD May 13 2019 Coffee prevents deaths There have been studies saying coffee drinking increases longevity and general health and also studies to the contrary. Now, the latest research shows that drinking at least two cups of coffee per day can increase the life expectancy of consumers by up to around two years. The results of the large and fairly conclusive study titled, “Coffee consumption and all-cause and cause-specific mortality: a meta-analysis by potential modifiers,” were published in the latest issue of the European Journal of Epidemiology . The study analysed previous studies on benefits of drinking coffee by looking at 40 studies that included around 3,852,651 participants of which there were 450,256deaths. They noted that drinking coffee reduced all-cause mortality or risk writing that it decreased death rates, “irrespective of age, overweight status, alcohol drinking, smoking status, and caffeine content of coffee”.  They compared consumption of four cups of coffee per day and found that it was responsible for more reduction in cause specified death as well as deaths due to all causes when compared to consumption of no coffee. Coffee consumption was also associated with reduced risk of getting and dying due to cancers, diabetes, lung disease and heart disease. They analyzed subjects and the effects coffee had on them by correcting for other factors such as age, obesity and lifestyle choices. The study authors noted that coffee was more likely to reduce risk of death among those from Europe and Asia than Americans. The authors quantify according to their findings; 3.5 cups of coffee per day reduced risk of all-cause death best 2.5 cups per day reduced risk of deaths due to heart disease best 2 cups per day reduced risk of cancer deaths best Image Credit: NOBUHIRO ASADA / Shutterstock These amounts seem to be of optimum benefit. More consumption than this did not change the findings. Authors write that coffee has been connected to a reduced risk of prostate cancer, Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease. Astrid Nehlig, a research director at France’s National Institute of Health and Medical Research in a statement said, “It is difficult to calculate, but my feeling is that drinking coffee possibly adds another couple of years to your life.” He added that more focus and attention could be the reason behind this longevity. Authors concluded, “Moderate coffee consumption (e.g. 2-4 cups/day) was associated with reduced all-cause and cause-specific mortality, compared to no coffee consumption.” Six or more cups harmful In yet another study from Australian researchers, it was found that there was an optimum amount of coffee that was beneficial. The new study was published this month in the journal American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and was titled, “Long-term coffee consumption, caffeine metabolism genetics, and risk of cardiovascular disease: a prospective analysis of up to 347,077 individuals and 8,368 cases.” Researchers from the University of South Australia in their study published this month set out to ascertain the amount of coffee that was beneficial for health. They noted that drinking six or more cups of coffee per day could be harmful for health and raise the risk of heart disease by up to 22 percent. The researchers write that one in six persons are suffering from heart disease in Australia. The World Health Organization calls cardiovascular disease the leading cause of death as well as one of the most preventable causes of death. Dr Ang Zhou and Professor Elina Hyppönen of the Australian Centre for Precision Health looked at the long term effects of coffee consumption and heart disease. They explain that research shows that excess coffee can harm the heart by raising blood pressure. They write that this is the first study that outlines the upper limit of coffee consumption in terms of benefit and harm. Prof Hyppönen in a statement said, “Coffee is the most commonly consumed stimulant in the world -- it wakes us up, boosts our energy and helps us focus -- but people are always asking 'How much caffeine is too much?'” She added, “Most people would agree that if you drink a lot of coffee, you might feel jittery, irritable or perhaps even nauseas -- that's because caffeine helps your body work faster and harder, but it is also likely to suggest that you may have reached your limit for the time being. We also know that risk of cardiovascular disease increases with high blood pressure, a known consequence of excess caffeine consumption.” Related Stories The caffeine conundrum in rapid depression treatments One cup of coffee a day could keep atrial fibrillation from coming back Edible packaging offers a biodegradable alternative to plastic waste On this study Prof Hyppönen said, “In order to maintain a healthy heart and a healthy blood pressure, people must limit their coffees to fewer than six cups a day -- based on our data six was the tipping point where caffeine started to negatively affect cardiovascular risk.” The team used data from the UK Biobank including 347,077 participants aged 37-73 years. They in addition also looked at the caffeine-metabolizing gene (CYP1A2). People with this gene could metabolize coffee faster than others. The team found that even carriers of this gene could not safely consume more caffeine than others while maintain a healthy heart. Hyppönen said, “An estimated three billion cups of coffee are enjoyed every day around the world. Knowing the limits of what's good for you and what's not is imperative. As with many things, it's all about moderation; overindulge and your health will pay for it.” Part of a healthy diet A similar study on genetic variation and effects of coffee was published last year August by authors E Loftfield and colleagues in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine titled, “Association of Coffee Drinking With Mortality by Genetic Variation in Caffeine Metabolism: Findings From the UK Biobank.” This team looked at genetic variations at “AHR, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, and POR” genes. They looked at genetic data from 498,134 participants, their coffee consumption and the risk of all-cause deaths. Over 10 years of follow-up they noted 14,225 deaths. Their results showed that “Coffee drinking was inversely associated with mortality, including among those drinking 8 or more cups per day and those with genetic polymorphisms.” They wrote that “coffee drinking can be a part of a healthy diet”. Protects heart Authors Z. Gaeini and colleagues this month also published an article comparing coffee drinking and tea drinking in the journal Nutrition Metabolism . Their study was titled, “Tea, coffee, caffeine intake and the risk of cardio-metabolic outcomes: findings from a population with low coffee and high tea consumption.” This team included participants of the Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study (2006-2008 to 2012-2014). They looked at effects of coffee and tea drinking among Iranian populations on heart disease and kidney disease. They followed up their participants for an average of six years and noted that coffee had protective effects on heart disease. Tea consumption on the other hand was found to be detrimental to the heart in Iran. They added that it could be due to the “additives or artificial colors in tea consumed in Iran, and sweets or sugar that mostly consumed accompanied by tea”. Sources: https://www.coffeeandhealth.org/ https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/109/3/509/5369955?redirectedFrom=fulltext https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/article-abstract/2686145 https://nutritionandmetabolism.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12986-019-0355-6 Posted in: Men's Health News | Medical Research News | Women's Health News Comments (0) Written by Dr. Ananya Mandal Dr. Ananya Mandal is a doctor by profession, lecturer by vocation and a medical writer by passion. She specialized in Clinical Pharmacology after her bachelor's (MBBS). For her, health communication is not just writing complicated reviews for professionals but making medical knowledge understandable and available to the general public as well. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report: APA Mandal, Ananya. (2023, January 20). Coffee and longevity – debate continues. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 23, 2025 from https://www.news-medical.net/news/20190513/Coffee-and-longevity-debate-continues.aspx. MLA Mandal, Ananya. "Coffee and longevity – debate continues". News-Medical . 23 November 2025. <https://www.news-medical.net/news/20190513/Coffee-and-longevity-debate-continues.aspx>. Chicago Mandal, Ananya. "Coffee and longevity – debate continues". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.net/news/20190513/Coffee-and-longevity-debate-continues.aspx. (accessed November 23, 2025). Harvard Mandal, Ananya. 2023. Coffee and longevity – debate continues . News-Medical, viewed 23 November 2025, https://www.news-medical.net/news/20190513/Coffee-and-longevity-debate-continues.aspx. Suggested Reading Compounds show significant inhibitory effects on α-glucosidase Coffee protects the brain, metabolism, and immunity at the molecular level Drinking coffee can protect against atrial fibrillation Eating habits tied to Parkinson’s risk: sweets and processed meats raise odds, fruit lowers them Review finds coffee linked to longer life and lower disease risk Study finds 7 to 8 cups a day of coffee, tea, and water tied to longer life Roasted Arabica coffee hides powerful antidiabetic molecules Daily coffee linked to lower risk of irregular heart rhythm episode in AFib patients Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post Sign in to keep reading We're committed to providing free access to quality science. By registering and providing insight into
        your preferences you're joining a community of over 1m science interested individuals and help us to
        provide you with insightful content whilst keeping our service free. Sign in with Google Sign in with Apple Sign in with LinkedIn Sign in with Facebook or Sign in with email Trending Stories Latest Interviews Top Health Articles Are mushrooms more than a low-calorie food? New analysis explains their hidden advantages New clinical trial shows promise for shorter TB treatment Machine learning tool helps evaluate ICU resource efficiency in severe pneumonia care Gut microbes may fuel allergic rhinitis symptoms Coffee protects the brain, metabolism, and immunity at the molecular level Redefining control and consistency in anaerobic microbiome workflows Sheela Muley and Sushmita Sudarshan Explore how smart automation enables precise, reproducible workflows in anaerobic microbiome research, improving accuracy and experimental control. AI in Healthcare: How generative tools are transforming clinical practice Dr Rahul Goyal Discover how generative AI is reshaping clinical care with real-world examples, challenges, and expert advice for AI adoption in healthcare The future of automation: Machine learning–driven hepatocyte and organoid counting Dan Schieffer DeNovix discusses how customer demand inspired the development of specialized CellDrop applications for hepatocytes and organoids. Why Kiwifruit Is a Superfood: Health Benefits Supported by Research Amla (Indian Gooseberry) Health Benefits: From Vitamin C to Anti-Aging Evidence Why Pomegranate Is Good for You: Evidence-Based Insights Into Its Health Benefits ADHD in Girls vs Boys: Key Differences in Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment Seaweed and Human Health: Antioxidants, Iodine, and Neuroprotective Effects Latest News Discovery of sequence-driven DNA methylation offers new path for epigenetic engineering New research identifies molecular pathways linking hot weather and preterm birth risk American Heart Association honors schools and students for fighting childhood obesity Intranasal nanomedicine shows promise against glioblastoma New sequencing method reveals how transposons move and shape the genome Newsletters you may be interested in Nutrition ( Subscribe or Preview ) Diabetes ( Subscribe or Preview ) Genetics ( Subscribe or Preview ) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home GLP-1 Agonists News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Posters Podcasts Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Posters Podcasts Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance
                                                        with these terms and conditions .
                                                        Please note that medical information found
                                                        on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship
                                                        between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Sunday 23 Nov 2025 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2025 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content . Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI . Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy . Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms . Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena
            answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses.
            Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or
            authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for
            medical information you must always consult a medical
            professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with
            OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their
            privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential
            information. Read the full Terms & Conditions . Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Coffee protects the liver by blocking inflammation and scarring, review finds