Working Hours - Our World in Data Our World in Data Browse by topic Data Insights Resources About Subscribe Donate Gdoc / Admin Working Hours By: Charlie Giattino , Esteban Ortiz-Ospina , and Max Roser Cite this work Reuse this work Introduction Research & Writing Charts Work is a central part of our lives. It is something we do almost every day, for much of the day, for decades on end. Because it is so central, looking closely at how much time we spend working can tell us a lot about our lives and the societies we live in. How much do people around the world work? In many countries today, people work much less than in the past 150 years. Working less means being able to spend time becoming more educated or simply enjoying leisure time. This is substantial progress, but there are still huge inequalities across and within countries, and progress still to make. Here we present the data on working hours. We explore how it differs across countries and over time and how these differences matter for people’s lives. Related topics Time Use Child Labor Research & Writing December 16, 2020 Are we working more than ever? Working hours for the average worker have decreased dramatically over the last 150 years. Charlie Giattino and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina December 21, 2020 Do workers in richer countries work longer hours? Workers in richer countries tend to work fewer hours than those in poorer countries. Charlie Giattino and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina January 06, 2021 How are working hours measured and what can we learn from the data? The primary way to measure working hours is with surveys, but the data can have limitations that are important to understand. Charlie Giattino and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina Key Charts on Working Hours See all charts on this topic Annual working hours per person employed Annual working hours per worker Long-run data Annual working hours per worker, various sources Annual working hours vs. GDP per capita Penn World Table Annual working hours vs. productivity Average effective age of retirement for women Days off from work for vacations and holidays Hours of work vs. GDP per capita Productivity: output per hour worked Weekly working hours Weekly working hours vs. hourly wage, by wage decile Paid and self-employment Weekly working hours vs. hourly wage, by wage decile Paid employment only Chart 1 of 12 Cite this work Our articles and data visualizations rely on work from many different people and organizations. When citing this topic page, please also cite the underlying data sources. This topic page can be cited as: Charlie Giattino, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Max Roser (2020) - “Working Hours” Published online at OurWorldinData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/working-hours' [Online Resource] BibTeX citation @article{owid-working-hours,
    author = {Charlie Giattino and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina and Max Roser},
    title = {Working Hours},
    journal = {Our World in Data},
    year = {2020},
    note = {https://ourworldindata.org/working-hours}
} Reuse this work freely All visualizations, data, and code produced by Our World in Data are completely open access under the Creative Commons BY license . You have the permission to use, distribute, and reproduce these in any medium, provided the source and authors are credited. The data produced by third parties and made available by Our World in Data is subject to the license terms from the original third-party authors. We will always indicate the original source of the data in our documentation, so you should always check the license of any such third-party data before use and redistribution. All of our charts can be embedded in any site. Our World in Data is free and accessible for everyone. Help us do this work by making a donation. Donate now Our World in Data is a project of Global Change Data Lab , a nonprofit based in the UK (Reg. Charity No. 1186433). Our charts, articles, and data are licensed under CC BY , unless stated otherwise. Tools and software we develop are open source under the MIT license . Third-party materials, including some charts and data, are subject to third-party licenses. See our FAQs for more details. Explore Topics Data Insights Resources Latest Articles SDG Tracker Teaching with OWID About About Us Organization Funding Team Jobs FAQs RSS Feeds Research & Writing Data Insights Follow us Privacy policy Legal disclaimer Grapher license