Do Birds Really Abandon Their Chicks If Humans Touch Them? | Live Science Skip to main content Live Science Plus - Join our community JOIN NOW 10 Member Features 24/7 Access Available 5K+ Active Members 🎯 Live Q&A Sessions Weekly interactive sessions 🏆 Member Competitions Win exclusive prizes 📚 Exclusive Content Premium articles & videos ⚡ Early Access First to see new features 💬 Private Forums Connect with members 🎁 Monthly Rewards Surprise gifts & perks GET LIVE SCIENCE PLUS It's quick and easy to access Live Science Plus, simply enter your email below. We'll send you a confirmation and sign you up for our daily newsletter, keeping you up to date with the latest science news. By submitting your information, you confirm you are aged 16 or
over, have read our Privacy Policy and agree to the Terms & Conditions . Geographical rules apply. FIND OUT ABOUT OUR MAGAZINE Want to subscribe to the magazine? Click the button below to
find out more information. Find out more Open menu Close main menu Live Science Sign up to our newsletter Newsletter RSS Sign in View Profile Sign out Search Search Live Science Space Health Planet Earth Animals Archaeology Physics & Math Technology Human Behavior Chemistry More Science news Opinion Life's Little Mysteries Science quizzes Crossword About us Newsletters Follow us Story archive Don't miss these Animals Best binoculars for bird-watching 2025: Eyes on the skies Technology Best binoculars for kids 2025: Beginner binoculars and toys Birds 'Rare' ancestor reveals how huge flightless birds made it to faraway lands Birds Rare blue-and-green hybrid jay spotted in Texas is offspring of birds whose lineages split 7 million years ago Animals Which animals are tricked by optical illusions? Dinosaurs Scientists find baby pterosaurs died in violent Jurassic storm 150 million years ago Plants Do figs really have dead wasps in them? Archaeology 750-year-old grass shoe discovered in a vulture's nest in Spain Viruses, Infections & Disease 'Your fear is well-founded': How human activities have raised the risk of tick-borne diseases like Lyme Archaeology 12,000-year-old figurine of goose mating with naked woman discovered in Israel Domestic Cats Can you speak cat? Scientists develop quiz that reveals how well you understand our feline friends Toads Can you actually get high from licking a toad? Land Mammals The viral 'Chicago Rat Hole' wasn't actually made by a rat, scientists claim Animals Human trash is 'kick-starting' the domestication of city-dwelling raccoons, study suggests Penguins Fossil of huge penguin that lived 3 million years ago discovered in New Zealand — what happened to it? Trending Comet 3I/ATLAS Three more stranded taikonauts Woman with brother's XY chromosomes 'Impossible' black hole collision Perfectly preserved Neanderthal skull Animals Birds Do Birds Really Abandon Their Chicks If Humans Touch Them? News By Rose Eveleth published 6 December 2011 When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works . (Image credit: Creative Commons) If there's one thing everyone knows about baby birds, it's that you're not supposed to pick them up. If you do, the mother bird will smell the residue of your stinky human hands on her baby, and leave the piteously crying chick there to die, right? Wrong, says Miyoko Chu, a biologist at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology. "Birds don't have a very strong sense of smell ," she said, "so you won't leave a scent that will alarm the parent." In fact, contrary to what our parents may have told us, most bird parents are unlikely to abandon their chicks over a little human fiddling. "Usually, birds are quite devoted to their young and not easily deterred from taking care of them," Chu said. You may like 'Rare' ancestor reveals how huge flightless birds made it to faraway lands Rare blue-and-green hybrid jay spotted in Texas is offspring of birds whose lineages split 7 million years ago Which animals are tricked by optical illusions? But before you put on your Bird Rescuer costume and start saving the day, Chu suggests you shouldn't go around picking up every baby bird you see. Baby birds may look stranded when in fact their parents are hiding close by. In fact it's very common for young birds to leave the nest before they're ready to hit the skies. "If you back up and watch them," Chu said, "in a lot of cases the parent will come back and feed the young and protect it." And your handling of the bird might be doing more harm than good, said Tom Hahn, an ornithologist at the University of California in Davis. "A much bigger risk to the babies, if humans mess around with them, is that the activity of the human around the nest may attract the attention of predators, which may subsequently come get the babies," he says. If the chick is clearly out of the nest too soon, the rescue-minded should call a local wildlife rehabilitator before trying to relocate the bird themselves. But, Chu said, if the bird is in a highly unsafe area, such as on a road or in a neighborhood full of cats, it's fine to gently pick the baby up and put it back into its nest. Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter now Get the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox. Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. The Weirdest Mothering Tricks in the Animal World The 5 Smartest Non-Primates on the Planet Do Animals Know Right from Wrong? New Research Points to 'Yes' Rose Eveleth Life's Little Mysteries Contributor Read more 'Rare' ancestor reveals how huge flightless birds made it to faraway lands Rare blue-and-green hybrid jay spotted in Texas is offspring of birds whose lineages split 7 million years ago Which animals are tricked by optical illusions? Scientists find baby pterosaurs died in violent Jurassic storm 150 million years ago Do figs really have dead wasps in them? 750-year-old grass shoe discovered in a vulture's nest in Spain Latest in Birds Fossil of huge penguin that lived 3 million years ago discovered in New Zealand — what happened to it? Rare blue-and-green hybrid jay spotted in Texas is offspring of birds whose lineages split 7 million years ago 'Rare' ancestor reveals how huge flightless birds made it to faraway lands Best bird song identification apps in 2025 — Identify bird calls and improve your avian knowledge Kākāpō: The chonky parrot that can live almost 100 years Japanese quail: The bird with weird sperm foam, a post-sex strut and a spot in space history Latest in News Viking Age woman found buried with scallop shells on her mouth, and archaeologists are mystified '3I/ATLAS is a comet': NASA finally releases new 3I/ATLAS images and addresses alien rumors 'A forest with bonobos has never been so quiet': Most extreme case of violence in 'hippie' species recorded, with females ganging up on male in unprecedented attack Human trash is 'kick-starting' the domestication of city-dwelling raccoons, study suggests US could lose its measles elimination status within months, experts say Death Valley shrub rearranges its insides to thrive in one of the hottest places on Earth LATEST ARTICLES 1 Canon 12x36 IS III binocular review 2 Viking Age woman found buried with scallop shells on her mouth, and archaeologists are mystified 3 '3I/ATLAS is a comet': NASA finally releases new 3I/ATLAS images and addresses alien rumors 4 'A forest with bonobos has never been so quiet': Most extreme case of violence in 'hippie' species recorded, with females ganging up on male in unprecedented attack 5 Death Valley shrub rearranges its insides to thrive in one of the hottest places on Earth Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site . Add as a preferred source on Google About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Advertise with us Web notifications Careers Editorial standards How to pitch a story to us ©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. Close Please login or signup to comment Please wait... Login Sign Up