Why there is no such thing as a healthy diet that works for everyone | New Scientist Close Advertisement Skip to content Sign in Search the website Events Tours Shop Subscribe now Explore by section News Features Newsletters Podcasts Video Comment Culture Games | This week's magazine Explore by subject Health Space Physics Technology Environment Mind Humans Life Mathematics Chemistry Earth Society Explore our products and services Events Tours Shop Subscribe now Subscribe now Health Why there is no such thing as a healthy diet that works for everyone What is good for us to eat varies so much from person to person that a universally wholesome diet is a fiction. Instead, the science of nutrition is hot on the heels of a new recipe for healthy eating By Graham Lawton 9 September 2020 Facebook / Meta Twitter / X icon Linkedin Reddit Email Tatsuro Nishimura FOR about a decade, geneticist Tim Spector of King’s College London ate the same thing every day: a tuna and sweetcorn sandwich on brown bread, followed by a banana . He thought it was a healthy choice, until he turned the microscope on himself and discovered that it was about the worst possible thing he could eat. He was having huge post-lunch surges of sugar and fat in his bloodstream, both of which are known risk factors for diabetes , heart disease and obesity . But just because tuna sandwiches are bad for Spector doesn’t mean they are bad for everyone. Far from it: for some people, they are super healthy. The same is true of almost any food, even things like ice cream and white bread that have long been considered universally bad news. Recent research by Spector and others has revealed that our response to food is highly individualised and that, consequently, there is no such thing as a healthy diet that works for everybody. In fact, people respond to food in such idiosyncratic ways that everybody needs a personalised nutrition plan. Now he and others, including the US National Institutes of Health, are seeking to deliver such plans in a healthy eating revolution that is being called “precision nutrition”. The findings could also explain why decades of one-size-fits-all dietary advice has failed to halt the global epidemic of obesity and diabetes and why nutrition science has consistently failed to produce a straight answer to its most pressing question: what constitutes a healthy diet? The idea of diet as a major determinant of health goes back to at least… Advertisement Sign up to our weekly newsletter Receive a weekly dose of discovery in your inbox. We'll also keep you up to date with New Scientist events and special offers. Sign up To continue reading, subscribe today with our introductory offers Unlock this article or Existing subscribers Sign in to your account Advertisement More from New Scientist Explore the latest news, articles and features Health A fascinatingly grisly guide to replacing and repairing body parts Culture Health Cars are getting bigger. This is a problem for us and for the planet Comment Health The vital, overlooked role of body fat in shaping your health and mind Features Health Our bodies are ageing faster than ever. Can we hit the brakes? Features Popular articles Trending New Scientist articles 1 Astronomers may have glimpsed evidence of the biggest stars ever seen 2 Common type of inflammatory bowel disease linked to toxic bacteria 3 How a new way of thinking about fat could transform your health 4 The vital, overlooked role of body fat in shaping your health and mind 5 Physics of light and magnetism rewritten after almost two centuries 6 Cats revealed in all their glory in stunning new photographs 7 Why aren't young people having sex any more? 8 Extinct animals in Prehistoric Planet: Ice Age make it a must-watch 9 Mosquito proboscis repurposed as a fine nozzle for 3D printing 10 Oldest ever RNA sample recovered from woolly mammoth Advertisement Close Close Download the app Find us on social media Instagram Facebook X / Twitter Tiktok LinkedIn BlueSky Subscriptions Subscriber benefits Gift Student & graduate Educational Corporate Support Contact us FAQs About us Press room Advertise Write for us Tools Events CoLab Syndication RSS feeds Legal and privacy Complaint policy Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms & conditions Cookie Settings © Copyright New Scientist Ltd. Back to the top