Highlights from CERN in 2012 | CERN Skip to main content CERN Accelerating science Sign in Directory Toggle navigation About CERN At CERN, we probe the fundamental structure of particles that make up everything around us. We do so using the world's largest and most complex scientific instruments. Know more Who we are Our Mission Our Governance Our Member States Our History Our People What we do Fundamental research Contribute to society Environmentally responsible research Bring nations together Inspire and educate Fast facts and FAQs Key Achievements Key achievements submenu The Higgs Boson The W boson The Z boson The Large Hadron Collider The Birth of the web Antimatter News Featured news, updates, stories, opinions, announcements CERN reaffirms its commitment to environmenta... At CERN News 13 November, 2025 Arts at CERN and the Nobel Prize Museum colla... At CERN News 11 November, 2025 CERN Council reviews feasibility study for a ... Accelerators Press release 10 November, 2025 First observation of single top quark product... Physics News 3 November, 2025 Latest news News Accelerators At CERN Computing Engineering Experiments Knowledge sharing Physics Events CERN Community News and announcements Official communications Events Scientists News Press Room Press Room submenu Media News Resources Contact Science Science The research programme at CERN covers topics from kaons to cosmic rays, and from the Standard Model to supersymmetry Know more Physics Antimatter Dark matter The early universe The Higgs boson The Standard Model + More Accelerators CERN's accelerators The Antiproton Decelerator The Large Hadron Collider High-Luminosity LHC + More Engineering Accelerating: radiofrequency cavities Steering and focusing: magnets and superconductivity Circulating: ultra-high vacuum Cooling: cryogenic systems Powering: energy at CERN + More Computing The CERN Data Centre The Worldwide LHC Computing Grid CERN openlab Open source for open science The birth of the web + More Experiments ALICE ATLAS CMS LHCb + More Resources Featured resources CERN Courier Sep/Oct 2025 Courier Physics 1 September, 2025 High-Luminosity LHC images Image Accelerators 20 June, 2018 LHC Facts and Figures Brochure Knowledge sharing 10 May, 2022 See all resources By Topic Accelerators At CERN Computing Engineering Experiments Knowledge sharing Physics By format 360 image Annual report Brochure Bulletin Courier Image Video + More By audience CERN community Educators General public Industry Media Scientists Students + More search E.G. BIRTH OF WEB, LHC PAGE 1, BULLETIN... E.G. BIRTH OF WEB, LHC... Search Search | en en fr News News Topic: 
				Experiments Voir en français Highlights from CERN in 2012 A Higgs-like boson, more new particles and record performance at the LHC: 2012 has been good to CERN 21 December, 2012 | By Cian O'Luanaigh A candidate event in the search for the Higgs boson, showing two electrons and two muons (Image: CMS/CERN) It's been an important year for physics at CERN. "[This year] will go down in history as marking the first of the LHC's major discoveries, a defining moment in the history of science," says Director-General Rolf Heuer in his end-of-year message to CERN people . On 4 July the ATLAS and CMS collaborations announced that they had both observed a new particle , consistent with the long-sought Higgs boson . "Though we don't yet know the full details of the particle announced in July, it is looking more and more like the Higgs boson first proposed in 1964," says Heuer. The discovery was made possible by the excellent performance of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which broke several performance records this year. In April the LHC experiments started taking data at the new collision energy of 8 TeV (up from 7 TeV in 2011) and the collider delivered a record number of collisions to the experiments this year. The LHC collided protons with lead ions for the first time in a test run for further lead-proton collisions in 2013, and rounded off the year in style with a new performance milestone , nearly doubling the number of proton bunches in the machine, just as the three-year proton run came to an end. The LHCb experiment discovered two excited states for the Λ b beauty particle , and measured of one of the rarest processes so far observed in particle physics, the decay of a B s (pronounced B-sub-s) meson into two muons. ALICE performed detailed studies of the quark-gluon plasma , the matter of the primordial universe , and measurements from the TOTEM experiment are giving insights on the structure of the proton and provide input to the analyses of the other LHC experiments. Also this year, CERN signed a contract with the Wigner Research Centre for Physics in Budapest, Hungary, to extend the capabilities of the CERN Data Centre ; there were exciting results from the antimatter hall as ALPHA made the first spectroscopic measurements of antihydrogen ; and CERN celebrated several anniversaries: the Proton Synchrotron Booster celebrated its 40th birthday and to mark 100 years of research in cosmic rays the laboratory welcomed the astronauts who placed the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer on the International Space Station. Although the LHC will not be running after February 2013, CERN certainly will. The whole accelerator chain will undergo maintenance, ready for running at a higher energy in 2015. Projects such as the Compact Linear Collider and High Luminosity LHC are already working on next-generation technology for future accelerators and detectors . 2013 is sure to be a busy year for CERN. We're very much looking forward to it. ALPHA Higgs boson ATLAS CMS LHCb Related Articles Breakthrough in antimatter production Experiments News 18 November, 2025 Optical fibre link to make CERN more on time ... Experiments News 21 February, 2025 ALPHA experiment at CERN observes the influen... Physics Press release 27 September, 2023 View all news Also On Experiments Breakthrough in antimatter production Experiments News 18 November, 2025 Barbara Latacz awarded 2025 Boeing Quantum Cr... Experiments News 13 November, 2025 CMS congratulates its 2024 Thesis Award and 2... Experiments News 30 October, 2025 Which bin should I use for my unwanted cast-i... Experiments News 16 October, 2025 Preserving particle physics data Experiments News 25 September, 2025 Towards new physics with bent crystals Experiments News 29 August, 2025 ALICE honours its PhD thesis award winners Experiments News 25 July, 2025 Celebrating the outstanding achievements of t... Experiments News 8 July, 2025 AMS upgrade passes qualification tests with f... Experiments News 23 June, 2025 View all news Follow Us More Social Media Accounts Find us Contact us Getting here CERN Esplanade des Particules 1 P.O. Box 1211 Geneva 23 Switzerland CERN & You Doing business with CERN Knowledge transfer CERN's neighbours CERN & Society Foundation Partnerships Alumni General Information Careers Visits and public events Privacy policy Cookie Management Copyright ©
  2025
  CERN