Food Prices - Our World in Data Our World in Data Browse by topic Data Insights Resources About Subscribe Donate Gdoc / Admin Food Prices By: Hannah Ritchie , Pablo Rosado , and Max Roser Cite this work Reuse this work Introduction Data Explorer Research & Writing Charts Food prices matter for producers and consumers. They impact farmer’s incomes, and they matter for how much – and what foods – families can afford. The price of foods gives an important indicator of the balance between agricultural production and market demand. When supplies are tight, prices tend to rise, which can have a significant impact on their affordability for consumers. In low-to-middle-income countries, a large share of the population is employed in agriculture . Producers typically benefit from higher food prices; consumers from lower prices. Food markets can therefore have a strong impact on food affordability, hunger and undernourishment , and dietary quality. On this page, you can find data, visualizations, and writing on global and country-level food prices and expenditures, the affordability of food, and how this has changed over time. Related topics Employment in Agriculture Hunger and Undernourishment Fertilizers Explore data on Food Affordability Research & Writing July 12, 2021 Almost three billion people cannot afford a healthy diet A healthy, nutritious diet is much more expensive than a calorie sufficient one. Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado January 19, 2023 Engel's Law: Richer people spend more money on food, but it makes up a smaller share of their income How does spending on food change as incomes rise? Hannah Ritchie August 06, 2021 Smallholders produce one-third of the world’s food, less than half of what many headlines claim Most of the world's farmers are smallholders. They are also often the poorest. How much of the world's food do they produce? Hannah Ritchie Key Charts on Food Prices See all charts on this topic Share of population that cannot afford a healthy diet Food expenditure per person Share of consumer expenditure spent on food Share of population that cannot afford a calorie sufficient diet Annual food expenditure vs. total consumer expenditure Average income of large-scale food producers Average income of small-scale food producers Cost of a calorie sufficient diet as a share of average food expenditure Cost of a healthy diet as a share of average food spending Cost of a nutrient adequate diet as a share of average food expenditure Daily cost of a calorie sufficient diet Daily cost of a healthy diet Daily cost of a nutrient adequate diet Daily cost of foods in a healthy diet Food expenditure as a share of family disposable income in the United States Food expenditure per person in the United States By place of expenditure Global commodity price index of cereal crops and petroleum Indicator of food price anomalies Long-term global prices of food commodities Number of people that cannot afford a calorie sufficient diet Number of people that cannot afford a healthy diet Number of people that cannot afford a nutrient adequate diet Share of consumer expenditure spent on alcohol and tobacco Share of countries recording high food prices Share of expenditure spent on food vs. food expenditure per person Share of expenditure spent on food vs. total consumer expenditure Share of population that cannot afford a nutrient adequate diet Chart 1 of 27 Cite this work Our articles and data visualizations rely on work from many different people and organizations. When citing this topic page, please also cite the underlying data sources. This topic page can be cited as: Hannah Ritchie, Pablo Rosado, and Max Roser (2023) - “Food Prices” Published online at OurWorldinData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/food-prices' [Online Resource] BibTeX citation @article{owid-food-prices,
    author = {Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado and Max Roser},
    title = {Food Prices},
    journal = {Our World in Data},
    year = {2023},
    note = {https://ourworldindata.org/food-prices}
} Reuse this work freely All visualizations, data, and code produced by Our World in Data are completely open access under the Creative Commons BY license . You have the permission to use, distribute, and reproduce these in any medium, provided the source and authors are credited. The data produced by third parties and made available by Our World in Data is subject to the license terms from the original third-party authors. We will always indicate the original source of the data in our documentation, so you should always check the license of any such third-party data before use and redistribution. All of our charts can be embedded in any site. Our World in Data is free and accessible for everyone. Help us do this work by making a donation. Donate now Our World in Data is a project of Global Change Data Lab , a nonprofit based in the UK (Reg. Charity No. 1186433). Our charts, articles, and data are licensed under CC BY , unless stated otherwise. Tools and software we develop are open source under the MIT license . Third-party materials, including some charts and data, are subject to third-party licenses. See our FAQs for more details. Explore Topics Data Insights Resources Latest Articles SDG Tracker Teaching with OWID About About Us Organization Funding Team Jobs FAQs RSS Feeds Research & Writing Data Insights Follow us Privacy policy Legal disclaimer Grapher license