The Dangerous Truth About Cough CPR Locations: Abu Dhabi | Canada | Florida | London | Nevada | Ohio | Health Essentials Health Library Find a Provider Make an Appointment News Careers Contact Us Search Advertisement Advertisement August 12, 2020 / Health Conditions / Heart Health The Dangerous Truth About Cough CPR Coughing away a heart attack could delay medical help The internet is filled with misleading information and the buzzwords “cough CPR” are no different. Advertisement Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy The idea of cough CPR has been circulating the web for a few years now and has a slew of misinformation attached to it. The real danger about the misinformation is that it could prevent heart attack victims from getting the lifesaving help they need. Those social media posts claim that by coughing vigorously when you have a heart attack , you can keep yourself from passing out, theoretically saving yourself until your heart starts beating normally again. Cardiac surgeon A. Marc Gillinov, MD , and cardiologist Steven Nissen, MD , address the dangerous truth about cough CPR and what you should do instead: The facts Heart attacks are not the same thing as cardiac arrest. “Information regarding cough CPR on social media misleads readers,” says Dr. Gillinov. “This confuses heart attack and sudden cardiac death because they are two different things.” Heart attacks occur when the heart’s oxygen supply gets cut off, which is usually caused by blockages in the cardiac arteries that feed the heart oxygen-rich blood. When you have a heart attack, tissue in the heart can die. However, your heart usually keeps on beating. Cough CPR is ineffective for heart attacks. Cardiac arrest is the largest cause of natural death in the United States. During cardiac arrest, your heart can suddenly stop beating and serious irregularity in the heartbeat ( arrhythmia ) can cause this. You may have a higher risk of cardiac arrest if you had a previous heart attack. Advertisement “Cough CPR is an effective way to maintain circulation for a minute or two following cardiac arrest,” says Dr. Nissen. “However, it’s not useful in a patient with a heart attack and shouldn’t delay calling 911.” When cardiac arrest occurs, unconsciousness and death follow swiftly. Defibrillation is the only way to reliably reset the heart once it has suffered a fatal arrhythmia. If you see someone collapse following cardiac arrest, call 911 immediately. You can administer approved CPR techniques to keep oxygen circulating to the victim’s brain until medical help arrives. Cough CPR’s limited use Coughing violently physically forces blood from the chest up to the brain because of the pressure exerted from the cough. In a clinical setting, patients might be told to cough vigorously during testing, if healthcare professionals detect specific problems. The American Heart Association notes that cough CPR could also be considered in a cardiac catheterization laboratory where the patients are constantly monitored. “The bottom line is that cough CPR is not useful outside of a hospital setting,” says Dr. Nissen. If you’re experiencing the symptoms of a heart attack, you should immediately call 911. Anyone who loses consciousness following cardiac arrest cannot cough, or even breathe, and needs emergency help. If you’re witnessing a person having a heart attack, you should immediately call 911 or perform approved CPR rescue while a second bystander calls 911. “The most important advice to give is: If you get chest pain or feel faint or feel an irregular heartbeat, call 911,” says Dr. Gillinov.​ Advertisement Learn more about our editorial process . Health Library CPR What Is CPR? Treatment Details Recovery and Outlook Health Library CPR What Is CPR? Treatment Details Recovery and Outlook Advertisement Related Articles November 10, 2025 / Heart Health What To Know if You’re Flying With Heart Problems Making a health plan with your doctor before you leave will make it easier to sit back and enjoy your flight November 6, 2025 / Heart Health Common Reasons for Sudden, Sharp Chest Pain From heartburn and panic attacks to muscle spasms and heart attacks, lots of medical conditions can cause chest pain October 9, 2025 / Heart Health What You Need To Know About Vitamins and Supplements for Heart Health The vitamins, minerals and other nutrients in the food you eat are essential for a healthy heart, but supplements are another story September 5, 2025 / Heart Health How Is Aortic Stenosis Different From Other Valve Diseases? All heart valve diseases affect your heart’s valves, but there are some differences between symptoms, risk factors and how they can impact your health July 28, 2025 / Heart Health Understanding the Connection Between Stress and Heart Disease Chronic stress can trigger palpitations, inflammation, angina and other serious heart issues July 11, 2025 / Heart Health How To Know if You Need a Pacemaker Fainting, heart palpitations and shortness of breath are just a few signs your heart may need help July 3, 2025 / Heart Health Low Blood Pressure and High Heart Rate? Here’s What It Means You may notice this combination when you’re exercising or after standing up too fast June 23, 2025 / Heart Health A ‘Mild Heart Attack’ Is Still a Big Deal: Here’s What You Need To Know Mild heart attacks may cause less damage, but they can still lead to serious complications and require medical attention Trending Topics Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses Strep Throat or Just a Sore Throat? Here’s How To Tell the Difference If you have other cold and flu symptoms, it’s probably not strep Skin Care & Beauty The Best Winter Skin Care Tips How to deal with itchy, red or flaky dry skin Brain & Nervous System Drinking Alcohol in the Cold? 5 Tips on How To Stay Safe A cold one out in the cold can cause a false sense of warmth and increase your risk of hypothermia Health Categories To Explore Brain & Nervous System Children's Health Exercise & Fitness Heart Health Men's Health Mental Health Nutrition Orthopaedics Primary Care Skin Care & Beauty Wellness Women's Health Other Popular Categories Aging Well Allergies Cancer Care & Prevention Chronic Pain Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses Diabetes & Endocrinology Digestive Ear, Nose & Throat Eye Care Infectious Disease Lung Oral Health Parenting Pregnancy & Childbirth Recipes Rheumatology & Immunology Senior Health Sex & Relationships Sleep Urinary & Kidney Health Weight Loss Ad Rendered: Tue Nov 18 2025 02:10:29 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time) Facebook X YouTube Instagram LinkedIn Pinterest Snapchat Cleveland Clinic Home About Cleveland Clinic Careers at Cleveland Clinic Giving Community Outreach Research & Innovations Health Library Free Health eNewsletters Resources for Medical Professionals Media Relations Site Information & Policies Send Us Feedback About this Website Advertising Policy Social Media Policy Copyright, Reprints & Licensing Website Terms of Use Website Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Non-Discrimination and Availability Resources Mobile Apps Podcasts 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | © 2025 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.