What Do Food Cravings Mean? Facts and Myths, Explained Healthline Health Conditions Health Conditions All Breast Cancer Cancer Care Caregiving for Alzheimer's Disease Chronic Kidney Disease Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Digestive Health Eye Health Heart Health Menopause Mental Health Migraine Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Parkinson’s Disease Psoriasis Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) Sleep Health Type 2 Diabetes Weight Management Condition Spotlight All Controlling Ulcerative Colitis Navigating Life with Bipolar Disorder Mastering Geographic Atrophy Managing Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wellness Topics All CBD Fitness Healthy Aging Hearing Mental Well-Being Nutrition Parenthood Recipes Sexual Health Skin Care Sleep Health Vitamins and Supplements Women's Wellness Product Reviews All At-Home Testing Men's Health Mental Health Nutrition Sleep Vitamins and Supplements Women's Health Featured Programs All Your Guide to Glucose Health Inflammation and Aging Cold & Flu Season Survival Guide She’s Good for Real Tools Featured Video Series Pill Identifier FindCare Drugs A-Z Medicare Plans by State Lessons All Crohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis Essentials Diabetes Nutrition High Cholesterol Taming Inflammation in Psoriasis Taming Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis Newsletters All Anxiety and Depression Digestive Health Heart Health Migraine Nutrition Edition Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wire Lifestyle Quizzes Find a Diet Find Healthy Snacks Weight Management How Well Do You Sleep? Are You a Workaholic? Featured Health News All Medicare 2026 Changes Can 6-6-6 Walking Workout Help You Lose Weight? This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication 5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer Life Morning Coffee May Help You Live Longer This Just In 5 Tips for a Healthy Lifestyle How to Disinfect Your House After the Flu Best Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025 Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots? Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your Health Top Reads Best Multivitamins for Women Best Multivitamins for Men Best Online Therapy Services Online Therapy That Takes Insurance Buy Ozempic Online Mounjaro Overview Video Series Youth in Focus Healthy Harvest Through an Artist's Eye Future of Health Connect Find Your Bezzy Community Bezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app. All Breast Cancer Multiple Sclerosis Depression Migraine Type 2 Diabetes Psoriasis Follow us on social media Can't get enough? Connect with us for all things health. Subscribe Nutrition Evidence Based What Do Food Cravings Mean? Facts and Myths, Explained Medically reviewed by Amy Richter, MS, RD — Written by Alina Petre, MS, RD (NL) — Updated on July 20, 2023 Causes Nutrient deficiencies Craving nonfood items Bottom line If you have food cravings, it may be the result of a physical or mental cause. Physical causes may include lack of sleep, while mental causes may include stress. But there are some myths when it comes to the meaning of your food cravings. Food cravings are very common. They’re difficult to ignore and typically manifest through an intense or urgent desire for a specific type of food — though the food desired will vary from person to person. Food cravings can be brought on by a variety of factors — be it physical or mental. In certain cases, they may also be a sign of an underlying condition and should not be ignored. This article dives into what your food cravings may mean, as well as the possible reasons behind them. Possible causes for your cravings Food cravings can be caused by several factors, which can usually be split into two main categories: physical and mental. Being aware of them may help you identify which factors specifically trigger your cravings. Physical causes Leptin and ghrelin imbalances. An imbalance in these hunger and fullness hormones may cause certain people to experience more food cravings than others ( 1 ). Pregnancy. Hormonal changes in pregnancy may influence your smell and taste receptors, in turn, causing you to experience more intensified cravings ( 2 ). Premenstrual syndrome (PMS). The changes in the hormones estrogen and progesterone that occur right before your period may intensify cravings, especially for carb-rich foods ( 3 , 4 ). Lack of sleep. Too little or poor quality sleep can disturb your levels of the hormones responsible for regulating hunger, fullness, and sleep-wake cycles, possibly intensifying food cravings, especially in the evenings ( 5 , 6 ). A nutrient-poor diet. Nutrients like protein and fiber can help you feel full. A diet that’s low in these nutrients may cause you to feel hungry or experience cravings, even if you have otherwise eaten enough calories ( 7 , 8 ). Poor hydration. Ingesting too little fluids can intensify feelings of hunger or cravings in some people ( 9 ). Your gut flora. There is some evidence that the type of bacteria present in your gut may influence the frequency and type of cravings you may have. However, more research is needed to confirm this link ( 10 ). Physical activity. An increase in your level of physical activity, even if just by walking more, may help reduce food cravings. Similarly, moving less than you usually do may cause you to experience more food cravings ( 11 ). Highly processed foods. There is some evidence that highly processed foods rich in added fat and sugar may cause addiction-like symptoms, in turn, possibly increasing cravings ( 12 ). Frequency at which you eat the craved foods. Eating a craved food less frequently may be more effective at reducing your craving for that particular food than eating a small portion of that food whenever you crave it ( 11 , 13 , 14 ). Mental causes Stress. Stress can increase your levels of the hormone cortisol . High cortisol levels may be linked to hunger, cravings, and a higher likelihood of stress- or binge-eating behaviors ( 1 ). Your personality. Some evidence suggests that people who are more impulsive or have higher scores on measures of addictive personality may also have a higher likelihood of experiencing food cravings ( 12 , 15 ). Eating context. Your brain can associate eating a specific food to a specific context — for instance, popcorn and a movie. This may cause you to crave that particular food the next time the same context comes around. Your mood. Certain moods may trigger cravings for specific foods. For example, negative moods appear to often spark cravings for comfort foods ( 16 ). SUMMARY Food cravings can be brought on by a variety of factors — both physical and mental. Being aware of them may help you identify what triggers your food cravings and ultimately help you reduce them. Are cravings a sign of nutrient deficiencies? There is a popular belief that cravings are a sign that your body is lacking certain nutrients. Yet, in most cases, this theory is not currently supported by science for a few reasons. For instance, salt cravings may, in some cases, be caused by a sodium deficiency . However, most people who crave salty foods are not deficient in this nutrient ( 17 ). Moreover, based on this nutrient deficiency theory, you would expect that most cravings would be for nutrient-rich, minimally processed foods, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, or legumes. Yet in reality, most cravings tend to be for foods with low nutritional value, such as highly processed foods rich in added fat, sugar, or salt ( 16 ). In addition, research suggests that men and women tend to crave different foods. For instance, women are more likely to crave sweet-tasting foods, while men are likelier to crave savory ones ( 4 ). But there’s little evidence that women would be lacking nutrients more likely to be found in sweet foods and men would be lacking ones likelier found in savory ones. Finally, research suggests that the less frequently you eat certain foods, the less likely you are to crave them. However, if cravings were initiated by a low intake of these foods, you would expect the exact opposite effect to happen ( 11 , 13 , 14 ). SUMMARY There’s currently little evidence to support the idea that food cravings are caused by an insufficient intake of nutrients contained in said food. What if I crave nonfood items? Although craving food items is unlikely to be a sign of nutrient deficiencies, craving nonfood items might be. One example of this is pica , a condition that can cause people to crave nonfood items, such as ice, dirt, or laundry detergent. Pica occurs most commonly in children and pregnant women, and its exact cause has not yet been identified. However, studies suggest that people with pica often have low iron, calcium, or zinc levels. Moreover, their cravings for nonfood items often resolve when the lacking nutrients are supplemented ( 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 ). That said, not all cases of pica are resolved through supplementation. Therefore, more research is needed to determine the exact role that nutrient deficiencies play in pica ( 22 ). SUMMARY Craving nonfood items, such as ice, dirt, or laundry detergent, may be a sign of low levels of iron, zinc, or calcium. Still, more research is needed to confirm this link. The bottom line Food cravings can be caused by a variety of physical or mental factors. They may be a sign of hormonal imbalances, a suboptimal diet, high stress levels, or a lack of sleep or physical activity. Food cravings are seldom a sign that you’re lacking the nutrients found in that food. However, craving nonfood items, such as dirt, ice, or laundry detergent, may sometimes be caused by a diet that’s too low in certain nutrients. If you’re currently craving nonfood items, speak to your healthcare provider to rule out nutrient deficiencies as a cause. If you’re trying to find ways to help you with cravings for highly processed and sugary foods, check out this article . How we reviewed this article: History Share this article Evidence Based This article is based on scientific evidence, written by experts and fact checked by experts. Our team of licensed nutritionists and dietitians strive to be objective, unbiased, honest and to present both sides of the argument. This article contains scientific references. The numbers in the parentheses (1, 2, 3) are clickable links to peer-reviewed scientific papers. Medically reviewed by Amy Richter, MS, RD — Written by Alina Petre, MS, RD (NL) — Updated on July 20, 2023 related stories 11 Ways to Stop Cravings for Unhealthy Foods and Sugar When Do Pregnancy Cravings Start? Do Nutrient Deficiencies Cause Cravings? Why You Want to Eat All the Things Before Your Period 18 Healthy Foods to Eat When Cravings Strike Read this next 11 Ways to Stop Cravings for Unhealthy Foods and Sugar Written by Adda Bjarnadottir, MS, RDN (Ice) Food cravings are intense desires for specific foods, stronger than normal hunger. Here are 11 ways to stop cravings for sugar and unhealthy foods. READ MORE When Do Pregnancy Cravings Start? Medically reviewed by Holly Ernst, PA-C If you’re newly pregnant, you may find yourself wondering when pregnancy cravings start. We’ll let you know when to expect food cravings here. You’ll… READ MORE Do Nutrient Deficiencies Cause Cravings? Written by Alina Petre, MS, RD (NL) Cravings are often viewed as the body's way to correct nutrient deficiencies. Is this actually true? Find out what causes cravings and how to reduce… READ MORE Why You Want to Eat All the Things Before Your Period For most menstruating people, period cravings are just a part of life. Here's a look at why they happen, whether they're a sign of pregnancy, and how… READ MORE 18 Healthy Foods to Eat When Cravings Strike Written by Helen West, RD Craving unhealthy foods is common, especially if you're on a diet. Here are 18 healthy foods that can satisfy this urge without wrecking your diet. READ MORE 8 Common Symptoms of Food Addiction Written by Kris Gunnars, BSc Food addiction is a common eating disorder. Here are 8 common signs and symptoms of food addiction. READ MORE 7 Possible Causes of Craving Salt Craving salt may be a sign of a medical condition. Here are seven reasons you may be craving salt. READ MORE Everything You Need to Know About Pica People with pica compulsively eat nonfood items with no nutritional value. Learn about the causes, symptoms, and treatment. READ MORE Quiz: Do I Have a Healthy Relationship with Food? Medically reviewed by Kim Rose-Francis RDN, CDCES, LD A short, supportive quiz to help you understand whether your thoughts, habits, and emotions around eating reflect a balanced relationship with food or… READ MORE Does Intermittent Fasting Affect Cognitive Function? New Review Weighs Evidence Researchers report that intermittent fasting of less than 24 hours does not appear to diminish a person’s mental performance during the periods where… READ MORE © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Advertising Policy Health Topics Sitemap Medical Affairs Content Integrity Newsletters © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Careers Advertise with us OUR BRANDS Healthline Medical News Today Greatist Psych Central Bezzy