News and reports | Healthwatch Trafford Skip to main content Go to full content index Opens and closes menu Open search Header menu Contact us Main navigation Have your say Have your say News & reports Get involved Ways to get involved Volunteer Events Have your say Work with us What we do About us Our board Our staff Advice & information General advice Find services Help making a complaint Coronavirus: advice and guidance Search Search Enter the terms you wish to search for. News and reports Search Filter by article type Blog News Report Response Filter by theme(s) Autism Care homes Carers Complaints Coronavirus Dementia Dentistry Equality and diversity GP Home care Hospital care and discharge Maternity services Mental health Our policies and plans Patient information Pharmacy Service change Social care Apply Latest news and views View all news and views NHS issues flu jab SOS with worst of winter only weeks away The NHS has issued a ‘flu jab SOS’, with England’s top nurse warning people to get protected now, with only weeks to go before the worst of the flu season typically bites. 6 November 2025 News NHS artificial intelligence (AI) trial to diagnose prostate cancer up to a month faster (Via NHS England) The NHS will test an AI-powered ‘one-day diagnostics’ service for prostate cancer that could transform diagnosis and save some men up to a month of waiting. 2 November 2025 News Parental Mental Health: Your Voice Matters Have you become a parent in the past 2 years? Being in good mental health is important for all parents. Back in 2022, we invited local parents to share their experiences in relation to mental health round the birth of their child. Now we… 19 August 2025 News Palliative Care: Your Voice Matters Have you been involved with palliative care? 10 October 2025 News NHS kicks off flu and COVID jabs to ‘winter-proof’ vulnerable (NHS England) Flu and COVID-19 vaccines kick off for all eligible people from today to help ‘winter-proof’ those most vulnerable and the NHS amid new variants… 10 October 2025 News NHS App’s family access feature “as simple as switching Netflix profiles” according to NHS England A new family feature being piloted in the NHS App is making it easier for parents and carers to manage their loved ones’ health as simply as… 28 September 2025 News Latest reports and publication View all reports and publications Report - Exploring representation and effectiveness in Trafford’s Patient Participation Groups 24 October 2025 Representation in Patient Participation Groups (PPGs) is vital, as these groups act as a bridge between the community and GP practices. As such, ensuring a diversity of voices is heard and understood enables service planning which meets the needs of the local community. This project investigated representation within PPGs in Trafford, focusing on whether members felt their groups accurately reflected the demographics of their patient populations. Find out more Performance report April - May - June 2025 1 July 2025 Update of our work across April, May, and June 2025. Find out more Sign up for our news alerts Stay up to date with what people are telling us about health and social care, our advice and information, and latest reports. Sign up Footer menu - Primary Jobs Contact us Find Healthwatch on social media: Opens in a new window Opens an external site Opens an external site in a new window Footer menu - Secondary Terms & conditions Accessibility Cookies Privacy Log in © Healthwatch Trafford 2022 Please ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibility