Does Fat Turn into Muscle? Healthline Health Conditions Health Conditions All Breast Cancer Cancer Care Caregiving for Alzheimer's Disease Chronic Kidney Disease Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Digestive Health Eye Health Heart Health Menopause Mental Health Migraine Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Parkinson’s Disease Psoriasis Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) Sleep Health Type 2 Diabetes Weight Management Condition Spotlight All Controlling Ulcerative Colitis Navigating Life with Bipolar Disorder Mastering Geographic Atrophy Managing Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wellness Topics All CBD Fitness Healthy Aging Hearing Mental Well-Being Nutrition Parenthood Recipes Sexual Health Skin Care Sleep Health Vitamins and Supplements Women's Wellness Product Reviews All At-Home Testing Men's Health Mental Health Nutrition Sleep Vitamins and Supplements Women's Health Featured Programs All Your Guide to Glucose Health Inflammation and Aging Cold & Flu Season Survival Guide She’s Good for Real Tools Featured Video Series Pill Identifier FindCare Drugs A-Z Medicare Plans by State Lessons All Crohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis Essentials Diabetes Nutrition High Cholesterol Taming Inflammation in Psoriasis Taming Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis Newsletters All Anxiety and Depression Digestive Health Heart Health Migraine Nutrition Edition Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wire Lifestyle Quizzes Find a Diet Find Healthy Snacks Weight Management How Well Do You Sleep? Are You a Workaholic? Featured Health News All Medicare 2026 Changes Can 6-6-6 Walking Workout Help You Lose Weight? This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication 5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer Life Morning Coffee May Help You Live Longer This Just In 5 Tips for a Healthy Lifestyle How to Disinfect Your House After the Flu Best Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025 Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots? Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your Health Top Reads Best Multivitamins for Women Best Multivitamins for Men Best Online Therapy Services Online Therapy That Takes Insurance Buy Ozempic Online Mounjaro Overview Video Series Youth in Focus Healthy Harvest Through an Artist's Eye Future of Health Connect Find Your Bezzy Community Bezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app. All Breast Cancer Multiple Sclerosis Depression Migraine Type 2 Diabetes Psoriasis Follow us on social media Can't get enough? Connect with us for all things health. Subscribe Fitness Exercise Cardio Products Strength Training Yoga Holistic Fitness Nutrition Evidence Based Does Fat Turn into Muscle? What to Know Medically reviewed by Jake Tipane, CPT — Written by Katey Davidson, MScFN, RD, CPT on March 2, 2021 The reality Muscle vs. fat Weight loss How to lose fat How to build muscle Bottom line Losing fat doesn’t automatically lead to muscle gain. When you’re losing weight, your body uses fat for energy. To maintain or build muscle, try to do regular strength training and eat more protein. Trying to lose fat and build muscle is a common goal for many people. Among the many fitness myths out there, one of the most popular is the idea that you can turn fat into muscle through weight training and a healthy lifestyle. However, the process of fat loss and muscle building isn’t quite that simple. This article explains how to lose fat and build muscle in a healthy, sustainable way. Share on Pinterest Westend61/Getty Images Does fat turn into muscle? The simple answer is no. Turning fat into muscle is physiologically impossible, as muscle and fat are made up of different cells. A good analogy to this would be that you cannot turn a banana into an apple — they’re two separate things. The difference between muscle and fat Muscle comes in three forms: skeletal, cardiac (heart), and smooth (mostly found in the intestine). The muscle most often thought of in regards to body composition is skeletal muscle, which is attached to bones by tendons and allows for voluntary movement of the body ( 1 , 2 ). Skeletal muscle tissue comprises bundles of muscle fibers known as myofibrils. Myofibrils contain smaller fibers that consist of long chains of amino acids , which are the building blocks of protein. Amino acids contain a unique nitrogen group in their chemical structure ( 1 , 2 , 3 ). Contrarily, body fat — also known as adipose tissue — comprises triglycerides, which consist of a glycerol backbone and three fatty acid chains. Though various types of body fat exist, fat is exclusively made up of various carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms ( 4 , 5 ). Since muscle and fat cells have different chemical makeups, neither can be converted into the other ( 6 ). Summary Since fat and muscle tissue have entirely different cellular makeups, you can’t turn fat into muscle or vice versa. What changes during weight loss? Weight loss is most often a combination of losing fat, muscle, and glycogen stores (water weight). Ideally, most weight loss should come from fat loss ( 7 , 8 ). To lose weight, you must achieve a calorie deficit by eating fewer calories than your body needs daily, increasing physical activity to burn calories, or a combination of both. Yet, too large of a calorie deficit can lead to a rapid muscle mass loss, as the body will break down muscle to be used as an emergency fuel source. Thus, a moderate deficit of around 500 calories, or 10–20% of your total calorie needs per day, is recommended ( 8 , 9 , 10 ). During a moderate calorie deficit, body fat is used as fuel to support the body’s regular functions. Triglycerides stored in fat cells are broken down and sent to the mitochondria to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is the body’s main source of energy ( 11 , 12 ). Known as beta oxidation, this process produces carbon dioxide and water as byproducts. These are both exhaled during breathing and excreted via urine and sweat. As such, when fat is burned, it’s not turned into muscle but rather broken down into usable energy ( 13 , 14 ). To preserve muscle mass during weight loss, it’s recommended to engage in strength training at least 2–3 times per week. Furthermore, eating a protein-rich diet has been shown to reduce muscle loss during a calorie deficit ( 9 , 15 ). Summary During weight loss, fat is converted into usable energy and byproducts. To preserve muscle mass, it’s important to stick to a moderate calorie deficit, eat plenty of protein, and strength train a few times per week. How to lose fat If you’re looking to lose fat and build muscle, here’s how you can do it in a healthy, sustainable way. To lose fat, the body must be in a calorie deficit. You can achieve a calorie deficit by increasing your physical activity, eating fewer calories, or a combination of both. A modest increase in physical activity and decrease in calorie intake is most sustainable ( 16 , 17 ). Consuming mostly minimally processed, whole foods rich in fiber , healthy fats, and protein will help you achieve a calorie deficit without feeling deprived or hungry ( 16 , 17 ). Furthermore, it’s best to incorporate both cardiovascular and strength training, such as lifting weights, using resistance bands, or Pilates, 5–7 days per week ( 16 , 17 ). Examples of moderate intensity cardio include walking, running, or biking for over 20 minutes while still being able to talk with limited struggle. Meanwhile, strength training helps preserve and build muscle and can increase the body’s metabolic rate for upwards of 72 hours. This means that even after a good strength training session, your body will still burn extra calories ( 18 , 19 ). What’s more, muscle is more metabolically active than fat, meaning having more muscle on your body can further support weight loss by burning more calories ( 20 , 21 ). Thus, combining these two forms of exercise along with a minimally processed, whole food diet will support the body in achieving a calorie deficit. How to build muscle If you’re trying to build muscle and lose fat at the same time, it’s important to engage in strength training . Strength training combined with a high protein diet helps build new muscle cells through a process known as muscle protein synthesis. Most experts recommend at least 2–3 strength training sessions per week that target multiple muscle groups, along with adequate rest days to allow for muscle rebuilding ( 22 ). Muscle is built from a diet high in dietary nitrogen, mostly found in protein-rich foods. Protein from food is broken down and converted into amino acids to support muscle building ( 23 , 24 , 25 ). To maintain muscle during weight loss, be sure to eat enough protein and avoid a large calorie deficit. Most people should aim to get 0.6–0.9 grams of protein per pound (1.4–2.0 grams per kg) of body weight daily, or around 20–40 grams of protein per meal ( 15 , 25 , 26 , 27 ). Summary Sustainable fat loss while preserving muscle includes eating at a moderate calorie deficit, consuming adequate protein, and engaging in both cardio (aerobic) exercise and strength training 5–7 days per week. The bottom line It’s a myth that you can turn fat into muscle. During weight loss, fat is taken from fat cells and used to produce energy in the body along with other byproducts. Ideally, muscle is preserved through strength training and consuming a protein-rich diet. For sustainable, long-lasting weight loss, try to incorporate both cardio and strength training into your routine at least 5–7 days per week and eat a diet comprising mostly whole, minimally processed foods. While losing weight and gaining muscle requires dedication, the good news is that with a little effort, the body will adjust accordingly. How we reviewed this article: History Share this article Medically reviewed by Jake Tipane, CPT — Written by Katey Davidson, MScFN, RD, CPT on March 2, 2021 Read this next How Do Muscle and Fat Affect Weight? Medically reviewed by Jake Tipane, CPT Does muscle really weigh more than fat? Here’s the truth behind this myth, plus tips for building muscle and losing weight. READ MORE Moderate Intensity Exercise: What Counts, Benefits, and More Moderate intensity exercise gets your heart and breathing rates up. Learn more about what activities count, benefits, and more. READ MORE Low Intensity Exercise: What Counts, Benefits, and More Low intensity exercise encompasses activities that don't challenge you physically or get your heart rate up very much. Learn more about it. READ MORE Mat vs. Reformer Pilates: Which One Is Best For You? Medically reviewed by Danielle Hildreth, RN, CPT Mat and reformer Pilates offer similar benefits, such as improving your strength and mobility. However, there are some key differences to consider… READ MORE How To Use Resistance Bands and Exercises To Get You Started Resistance bands are versatile exercise tools that can help build strength, power, and range of motion. Learn more about exercises and how to choose… READ MORE How Long Does It Take To Walk 10,000 Steps? Medically reviewed by Meredith Goodwin, MD, FAAFP Walking 10,000 steps daily may take 1.5 to 2 hours if you're aiming to hit this goal in one walk. But many factors can influence this time. Learn more. READ MORE What Is The Hyrox Workout? Medically reviewed by Alissa Palladino, MS, RDN, LD, CPT By blending functional fitness with endurance racing, the Hyrox workout offers a structured yet dynamic challenge that fits athletes of various levels. READ MORE What are the Benefits of Vibration Plates? Medically reviewed by Angela M. Bell, MD, FACP Vibrations plates are a device that transmit mechanical energy throughout your body when you stand, sit, or lie on them. Learn more about possible… READ MORE How to Do A Kas Glute Bridge Medically reviewed by Alissa Palladino, MS, RDN, LD, CPT If you are looking to strengthen your glutes and improve hip stability, the kas glute bridge is a highly effective exercise worth adding to your… READ MORE How to Do An Arnold Press If you want to develop well-rounded shoulders and improve upper-body strength, the Arnold press is a smart addition to your workout routine. READ MORE © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Advertising Policy Health Topics Sitemap Medical Affairs Content Integrity Newsletters © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Careers Advertise with us OUR BRANDS Healthline Medical News Today Greatist Psych Central Bezzy