Your Free Speech Rights (Mostly) Don't Apply At Work Newsletters Games Share a News Tip Featured Featured Breaking News White House Watch Daily Cover Stories America's 2025 Top Wealth Management Teams Private Wealth List | Paid Program The Forbes CIO Next List: 2025 | Paid Program America's 2025 Top Wealth Management Teams High Net Worth List When Teens Fundraise To End Blood Cancer, They Change Lives, Including Their Own | Paid Program The Employee Well-Being Imperative | Paid Program Best-In-State Top Next-Gen Wealth Advisors 2025 AI’s Nuanced Impact And A Quest To Quantify It DNA of Success Visa Infinite Asia Pacific: Getting Away, Their Own Way | Paid Program Embracing And Bracing For AI Facing A Volatile Market, C-Suites Look To The CFO For Strategic Guidance Your Four-Part Blueprint To Unlock AI Value In 2025 | Paid Program By The Numbers: Meet The Forbes 30 Under 30 Europe Class Of 2025 Next Billion-Dollar Startups 2025 Four Reasons To Rethink Your Savings Strategy America's Most Powerful Women In Sports Navigating Retirement In Today’s Economic Landscape Get Your Data AI-Ready | Paid Program Streamline, Secure, Innovate: Inside Three Organizations That Rewired Their Networks For What’s Next | Paid Program CxO Spotlight: Innovation in Healthcare Forbes Iconoclast: How Top Investors Find Opportunities In Times Of Uncertainty Billionaires Billionaires See All World's Billionaires Forbes 400 America's Richest Self-Made Women China's Richest India's Richest Indonesia's Richest Korea's Richest Thailand's Richest Japan's Richest Australia's Richest Taiwan's Richest Singapore's Richest Philippines' Richest Hong Kong's Richest Malaysia's Richest Money & Politics Innovation Innovation See All Employee and Customer Experience The New Brand Growth Formula: A Data-Driven Culture Fueled By AI | Paid Program Enterprise AI AI Agentic AI Big Data Cloud Cloud 100 Consumer Tech Creator Economy Cybersecurity Digital Transformation Enterprise Tech Future Of Work Gaming Healthcare Innovation Rules Retail Industry SAP BrandVoice | Paid Program Science Social Media Sustainability & Climate Transportation Venture Capital Technology TikTok BrandVoice | Paid Program Metronome BrandVoice | Paid Program Leadership Leadership See All Under 30 C-Suite CEO Network CFO Network CHRO Network CIO Network CMO Network Leadership Strategies Careers Education Featured Partners Deloitte BrandVoice SAP BrandVoice Stand Together BrandVoice First Tee BrandVoice Dell Technologies BrandVoice Forbes EQ | Paid Program ForbesBLK Forbes Research ForbesWomen Dell Technologies BrandVoice | Paid Program Money Money See All ETF Investing Trends Banking & Insurance ETFs & Mutual Funds Fintech Hedge Funds & Private Equity Investing Investor Hub Markets Personal Finance Retirement Taxes Top Advisor | SHOOK Wealth Management Forbes Digital Assets Forbes Digital Assets See All News Crypto Prices NFT Prices Research Learn Crypto Basics BTC DeFi Web3 Education NFTs Crypto Investments Events Crypto Portfolios Business Business See All Aerospace & Defense Energy Food & Drink Hollywood & Entertainment Law Manufacturing Media Policy Retail SportsMoney Entertainment Digest Small Business Small Business See All Entrepreneurs Franchises Small Business Strategy Lifestyle Lifestyle See All Arts Boats & Planes Cars & Bikes Dining ForbesLife Forbes Travel Guide Spirits Style & Beauty Travel Vices Watches Real Estate Real Estate See All Commercial Real Estate Forbes Global Properties Residential Real Estate Forbes Vetted Forbes Vetted See All Mattress & Sleep Bed Frames Mattresses Mattress Toppers Pillows Sheets & Bedding Sleep Products Home Bathroom Cleaning & Laundry Decor Furniture Heating & Cooling Hobbies Home Office Kitchen & Dining Outdoor Pets Storage & Organization Tools Wine & Bar Fashion Accessories Clothing Eyewear Footwear Jewelry Handbags & Purses Lingerie & Sleepwear Outdoor & Fitness Apparel Outerwear Watches Kids & Baby Gear Baby Gear Kids Clothes & Accessories Nursery Pregnancy & Postpartum Toys & Books Gear Apparel & Accessories Bikes Camping & Hiking Climbing Fishing & Hunting Fitness Golf Running Tennis & Racket Sports Tools & Tech Training & Recovery Water Sports Wellness Winter Sports Beauty & Grooming Haircare Makeup Nailcare Shaving Skincare Personal Products Wellness & Self Care Tech & Electronics Audio Cameras Computers, Tablets & Accessories Gaming Home Office Online Tools Smart Home Devices Smartphones, Smartwatches & Accessories Streaming TVs Travel Cruises Hotels & Lodging Luggage Travel Products Gifts Father's Day Holiday Mother's Day Valentine's Day Wedding Deals Black Friday Cyber Monday Amazon Prime Day Beauty & Grooming Big Sales Fashion Gear Home Tech & Electronics Travel Deals Mattress & Sleep Deals Deals See All Fashion Nordstrom HOKA Quince Electronics Dell TopResume Sportswear & Gear Dick's Sporting Goods REI Mattress & Sleep Nectar Saatva Brooklinen Avocado DreamCloud Helix Sleep Bear Leesa Brooklyn Bedding Travel SeatGeek Vivid Seats Home & Garden Frontgate Wayfair Chewy Walmart West Elm Lists Lists See All 30 Under 30 50 Over 50 Top Colleges Advisor Advisor See All Credit Cards Best Credit Cards Travel Credit Cards 0% APR Credit Cards Balance Transfer Credit Cards Business Credit Cards Best First Credit Card Mortgages & Loans Best Mortgage Lenders Mortgage Refinance Lenders Personal Loans Business Loans Bad Credit Loans Debt Consolidation Loans Debt Relief Companies Student Loans Refinance Private Student Loans Banking Best CD Rates High Yield Savings Accounts Money Market Accounts Checking Accounts Business Checking Accounts Budgeting Apps Best Online Banks Insurance Health Insurance Companies Medicare Life Insurance Companies Best Car Insurance Companies Cheapest Car Insurance Companies Pet Insurance Companies Travel Insurance Companies Homeowners Insurance Companies Business Services How to Start a Business LLC Services Payroll Services HR Software HRIS Systems PEO Services Applicant tracking Systems Domain Registrars Hosting Services Website Builders Ecomm Platforms Landing Page Builders VOIP Services Answering Services Project Management Software Task Management Software Gantt Chart Software VPNs Anti Virus Software Password Managers Home Services Moving Companies Long Distance Moving Companies Car Shipping Companies Home Warranty Companies Solar Companies Solar Panels Home Security Companies Home Security Systems Internet Providers Cheapest Internet Providers Fastest High Speed Internet Providers Pest Control Companies Education Forbes Advisor UK Forbes Advisor CA Forbes Advisor AU Health Health See All Mental Health Best Online Therapy Online Therapy that Takes Insurance Online Psychiatrists Best Online Dating Sites & Apps Best Senior Dating Sites Best LGBTQ Dating Sites CBD CBD Gummies CBD Oil CBD Creams CBD for Anxiety CBD for Pain Supplements Protein Powder Preworkout Collagen Powders Creatine Supplements CoQ10 Supplements Hearing Health Best Hearing Aids OTC Hearing Aids Affordable Hearing Aids Medical Devices Best Medical Alert Systems Best Medical Alert Systems with Fall Detection Diet & Weight Loss Best Weight Loss Plans Newsletters Newsletters See All Forbes Daily Editorial Newsletters Forbes Games Forbes Games See All Frase by Forbes Pinpoint by LinkedIn Queens by LinkedIn Crossclimb by LinkedIn More From Forbes More From Forbes Forbes Video Forbes 101 Forbes Magazine Forbes Asia Free Issue of Forbes © 2025 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. Advertise with Forbes Forbes Licensing & Syndication Report a Security Issue Editorial Values and Standards Site Feedback Contact Us Careers at Forbes Tips Corrections Privacy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms AdChoices Reprints & Permissions Editors' Pick Leadership Careers Your Free Speech Rights (Mostly) Don't Apply At Work By Tom Spiggle , Senior Contributor. Forbes contributors publish independent expert analyses and insights. I’m an employment lawyer who writes about your workplace rights. Follow Author Sep 28, 2018, 09:56am EDT Oct 04, 2018, 04:47pm EDT Share Save This article is more than 7 years old. Getty Royalty Free Americans love their right to speak their mind. The First Amendment guarantee of freedom of speech is one of the parts of the Bill of Rights we are most likely to cite.But you don’t have freedom of speech everywhere. One place that often surprises many people where it doesn’t generally apply: Your workplace. Despite what many employees think, your rights to freedom of speech are fairly limited at work, and it’s often perfectly legal for an employer to take action against a worker for something they said or wrote. Indeed recently published an article closely examining the attitudes of American employees with respect to the role of politics in the workplace. It shows political views at work are increasingly becoming an issue and that Americans are concerned about it. Okay, so the article tells us what the employees think, but what does the law actually say about the rights of employees to engage in political speech or activities? Here’s what you need to know. What The First Amendment Guarantees — And What It Doesn’t From a strictly technical standpoint, the First Amendment bars Congress from enacting a law that would restrict an individual’s right to say or express themselves how they choose. Over time, that’s been expanded to include many actions by state and federal government. But it’s not absolute. For one thing, it only protects you from government actions. So as a general rule, a police officer can’t arrest you because you wore a hat supporting a particular political candidate. But your boss could fire you for the very same reason. However, there are a few exceptions or caveats that could apply to this statement. Exception #1: Your Employer Is the Government Employees working for the federal government enjoy broader free speech protections than if they worked for a private employer. But there are still limitations to what the employee can get away with saying or doing. In order for the government employee to receive free speech protections, what they say must: Involve an issue of public concern. If what’s being said is subject to a legitimate news topic and is being said as a regular citizen (rather than as an employee), then the speech is more likely to be protected from government-employer interference. Outweigh the government-employer’s interest in delivering efficient public services. Basically, if what the employee is saying is of little public concern and severely impedes the government-employer’s ability to carry out its function, then it’s less likely the speech will be protected. A good example of this involved a sheriff’s deputy who was fired for supporting the political rival of his boss. Specifically, the sheriff’s deputy “liked” the rival’s campaign Facebook page. The trial court initially concluded that “liking” something on Facebook did not fall under constitutionally protected speech, but the appeals court concluded that it did. The appeals court also found that it was clear that the sheriff’s deputy was speaking as a private citizen and “liking” the Facebook page did not disrupt the sheriff’s office. Exception #2: Concerted Activity If the employee’s speech concerns the employee’s rights to self-organize for collective bargaining purposes, it’s very difficult for the employer to ban that type of speech. This type of speech is protected by Sections 7 and 8 of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) as a protected “concerted activity.” Concerted activity refers to two or more employers taking actions to help or protect each other with respect to employment conditions or terms of employment. One exception to the concerted activity exception is if the employee’s speech is so abusive that it becomes “opprobrious,” then the NLRA’s concerted activity speech protections may not apply. This limit on concerted activity speech is fairly loose. In one case , the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB, which enforces the NLRA) concluded that an employee’s Facebook post in support of the move to unionize, was still protected, despite the fact that it was also filled with a personal and profanity-filled attack on his boss and his boss’ family. Exception #3: The Employer’s Actions Affect A Certain Class Of People If an employer’s otherwise lawful restriction on employee speech affects only a certain group of people, then the employer’s policy may be a form of illegal discrimination. For instance, an employer might have a rule against employees wearing Nike apparel in support of Colin Kaepernick in the office because it’s overly political or may interfere with employees getting their work done. But if only workers of a particular race are affected by this policy, the employer could be engaging in unlawful discrimination. Exception #4: State Law Says Otherwise The Constitution is the supreme law of the United States, but that doesn’t mean states can’t make their own laws providing additional rights and protections. Some states bar private employers from taking adverse employment actions against employees based on their political speech outside of work. For example, in California, employers cannot discriminate against employees based on their political activities or affiliation. One such case involved an employer that discriminated against members of the LGBT community by refusing to hire anyone referred to them by a particular civil and employment rights organization. The California Supreme Court held that such a policy violated California’s law protecting employees for their political activities because the policy could be construed to control the political actions of its employees. In Colorado, employers can’t have rules that may prevent an employee from engaging in political activities. And in Washington, D.C., political affiliation is a protected class. This means an employer that fires or disciplines an employee for their political speech could potentially be in trouble for violating the D.C. Human Rights Act. The exact protections and how they apply will be different in each state or jurisdiction. One thing to keep in mind is that many of these state laws only protect political speech outside of work. What’s Legal Can Still Be Bad For Business Even if there is no law preventing an employer from restricting its employee’s free speech rights, if an employer goes too far with a rule or policy, it can be bad for business. It can lead to anger and resentment among the workforce and if the public finds out, could turn off customers, leading to a drop-in sales or worse, negative publicity and a boycott of the company. In this digital and highly partisan age, so many people are just looking for a reason to take a stand against a company based on political, social or moral issues. To summarize, there’s nothing in the Constitution that says you have freedom of speech at work. But that doesn’t mean you can’t speak your mind, under the right circumstances. Editorial Standards Reprints & Permissions LOADING VIDEO PLAYER... FORBES’ FEATURED Video © 2025 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved. AdChoices Privacy Statement Your Privacy Choices Cookie Preferences Digital Terms of Sale Terms of Service Contact Us Send Us Feedback Report a Security Issue Jobs At Forbes Reprints & Permissions Forbes Press Room Advertise