Stars - NASA Science Explore Search News & Events News & Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts & Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News & Events Multimedia NASA+ Highlights 5 min read Webb First to Show 4 Dust Shells ‘Spiraling’ Apep, Limits Long Orbit article 4 days ago 3 min read NASA Celebrates Five Years of Artemis Accords, Welcomes 3 New Nations article 3 days ago 3 min read What’s Up: November 2025 Skywatching Tips from NASA article 3 days ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-REx Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto & Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Matter Dark Energy Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics & Space Science The Sun & Heliophysics Biological & Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones & You Technology Technology Transfer & Spinoffs Space Travel Technology Technology Living in Space Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, or Speakers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA's Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News & Events Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts & Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Multimedia Images Videos on NASA+ Interactives NASA Apps Podcasts e-Books STEM Multimedia Highlights 4 min read NASA’s TESS Spacecraft Triples Size of Pleiades Star Cluster article 3 days ago 5 min read NASA’s X-59 Completes First Flight, Prepares for More Flight Testing article 4 days ago 4 min read NASA Cassini Study Finds Organics ‘Fresh’ From Ocean of Enceladus article 4 days ago Highlights 8 min read 25 Years of Scientific Discovery Aboard the International Space Station article 2 days ago 4 min read Astronaut Candidates Get to Work at Johnson Space Center article 2 months ago 3 min read NASA Opens 2026 Human Lander Challenge for Life Support Systems, More article 2 months ago Highlights 6 min read NASA, Aerospace Corporation Study Sharpens Focus on Ammonia Emissions article 3 days ago 1 min read Amendment 17: Proposal Due Dates Reset for A.7 Water Quality Applications and A.8 Water Resources Applications. article 6 days ago 5 min read NASA, European Partners Set to Launch Sentinel-6B Earth Satellite article 1 week ago Highlights 3 min read What’s Up: November 2025 Skywatching Tips from NASA article 3 days ago 6 min read NASA’s Mars Spacecraft Capture Images of Comet 3I/ATLAS article 4 days ago 3 min read View Interstellar Comet 3I/ATLAS Through NASA’s Multiple Lenses article 4 days ago Highlights 2 min read Hubble Seeks Clusters in ‘Lost Galaxy’ article 2 days ago 1 min read Corrections to F.3 Exoplanets Research article 3 days ago 4 min read NASA’s TESS Spacecraft Triples Size of Pleiades Star Cluster article 3 days ago Highlights 3 min read 10 Years of Students Helping NASA Grow Space Food with Growing Beyond Earth article 2 days ago 8 min read 25 Years of Scientific Discovery Aboard the International Space Station article 2 days ago 2 min read Hubble Seeks Clusters in ‘Lost Galaxy’ article 2 days ago Highlights 5 min read NASA’s X-59 Completes First Flight, Prepares for More Flight Testing article 4 days ago 4 min read NASA Flights Study Cosmic Ray Effects for Air, Future Space Travelers article 2 months ago 3 min read NASA, Partners Push Forward with Remotely Piloted Airspace Integration article 2 months ago Highlights 8 min read What is BioSentinel? article 2 days ago 3 min read NASA, Industry Weave Data Fabric with Artificial Intelligence article 6 days ago 2 min read Amendment 9: F.10 PRISM Final Text and Due Dates article 2 months ago Highlights 1 min read Join Artemis article 6 days ago Highlights 6 min read NASA, Aerospace Corporation Study Sharpens Focus on Ammonia Emissions article 3 days ago 7 min read Experience the Launch of Artemis II article 4 days ago 5 min read Celebrating 25 Years of Humanity in Space article 4 days ago Highlights 3 min read Pódcast en español de la NASA estrena su tercera temporada article 5 months ago 5 min read Las carreras en la NASA despegan con las pasantías article 6 months ago 4 min read El X-59 de la NASA completa las pruebas electromagnéticas article 9 months ago Explore the Universe Universe Home Basics Cosmic History Building Blocks Forces Galaxies Overview Types Evolution Large Scale Structures Black Holes Overview Types Anatomy Black Hole Week Stars Overview Types Multiple Star Systems Planetary Systems Exoplanets Exploration Sensing the Universe Telescopes 101 Observatories More News Deep Dives Quick Reads Graphics Glossary Fun & Learning Star Basics Contents Birth Life Death Astronomers estimate that the universe could contain up to one septillion stars – that’s a one followed by 24 zeros. Our Milky Way alone contains more than 100 billion, including our most well-studied star, the Sun. Stars are giant balls of hot gas – mostly hydrogen, with some helium and small amounts of other elements. Every star has its own life cycle, ranging from a few million to trillions of years, and its properties change as it ages. Birth Stars form in large clouds of gas and dust called molecular clouds. Molecular clouds range from 1,000 to 10 million times the mass of the Sun and can span as much as hundreds of light-years. Molecular clouds are cold which causes gas to clump, creating high-density pockets. Some of these clumps can collide with each other or collect more matter, strengthening their gravitational force as their mass grows. Eventually, gravity causes some of these clumps to collapse. When this happens, friction causes the material to heat up, which eventually leads to the development of a protostar – a baby star. Batches of stars that have recently formed from molecular clouds are often called stellar clusters, and molecular clouds full of stellar clusters are called stellar nurseries. The edge of a nearby stellar nursery called NGC 3324, found at the northwest corner of the Carina Nebula, forms the “mountains” and “valleys” spanning this image captured by the James Webb Space Telescope. NASA, ESA, CSA, and STScI Life At first, most of the protostar’s energy comes from heat released by its initial collapse. After millions of years, immense pressures and temperatures in the star’s core squeeze the nuclei of hydrogen atoms together to form helium, a process called nuclear fusion. Nuclear fusion releases energy, which heats the star and prevents it from further collapsing under the force of gravity. Our Sun, a main sequence star, emits a strong solar flare flashes in this image captured by NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory. NASA/SDO Astronomers call stars that are stably undergoing nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium main sequence star s . This is the longest phase of a star’s life. The star’s luminosity, size, and temperature will slowly change over millions or billions of years during this phase. Our Sun is roughly midway through its main sequence stage. A star’s gas provides its fuel, and its mass determines how rapidly it runs through its supply, with lower-mass stars burning longer, dimmer, and cooler than very massive stars. More massive stars must burn fuel at a higher rate to generate the energy that keeps them from collapsing under their own weight. Some low-mass stars will shine for trillions of years – longer than the universe has currently existed – while some massive stars will live for only a few million years. Death At the beginning of the end of a star’s life, its core runs out of hydrogen to convert into helium. The energy produced by fusion creates pressure inside the star that balances gravity’s tendency to pull matter together, so the core starts to collapse. But squeezing the core also increases its temperature and pressure, making the star slowly puff up. However, the details of the late stages of the star’s death depend strongly on its mass. A low-mass star’s atmosphere will keep expanding until it becomes a subgiant or giant star while fusion converts helium into carbon in the core. (This will be the fate of our Sun, in several billion years.) Some giants become unstable and pulsate, periodically inflating and ejecting some of their atmospheres. Eventually, all the star’s outer layers blow away, creating an expanding cloud of dust and gas called a planetary nebula. The Helix nebula, imaged here, lies 650 light-years away in the constellation Aquarius. Also known as NGC 7293, it is a typical example of planetary nebulae. NASA/JPL-Caltech All that’s left of the star is its core, now called a white dwarf, a roughly Earth-sized stellar cinder that gradually cools over billions of years. A high-mass star goes further. Fusion converts carbon into heavier elements like oxygen, neon, and magnesium, which will become future fuel for the core. For the largest stars, this chain continues until silicon fuses into iron. These processes produce energy that keeps the core from collapsing, but each new fuel buys it less and less time. The whole process takes just a few million years. By the time silicon fuses into iron, the star runs out of fuel in a matter of days. The next step would be fusing iron into some heavier element but doing so requires energy instead of releasing it. The remnant of a supernova observed in 1572, notably studied by the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, lies about 13,000 light-years away in the constellation Cassiopeia. In this composite image, data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory have been combined with an optical image of stars in the same area. X-ray: NASA/CXC/RIKEN & GSFC/T. Sato et al; Optical: DSS The star’s iron core collapses until forces between the nuclei push the brakes, then it rebounds. This change creates a shock wave that travels outward through the star. The result is a huge explosion called a supernova. The core survives as an incredibly dense remnant, either a neutron star or a black hole . Material cast into the cosmos by supernovae and other stellar events will enrich future molecular clouds and become incorporated into the next generation of stars. Stars Stories Explore All Stars Stories Article 2 Min Read Hubble Seeks Clusters in ‘Lost Galaxy’ Article 4 Min Read NASA’s TESS Spacecraft Triples Size of Pleiades Star Cluster 6 Min Read NASA’s Roman Could Bring New Waves of Information on Galaxy’s Stars Article 5 Min Read Webb First to Show 4 Dust Shells ‘Spiraling’ Apep, Limits Long Orbit Article 2 Min Read Hubble Studies Star Ages in Colorful Galaxy Article Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Universe Galaxies Black Holes Exoplanets National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA's Mission Join Us Home News & Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG Budget & Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: May 02, 2025 Page Editor: Jeanette Kazmierczak Responsible NASA Official for Science: Diana Logreira Did you find what you were looking for? (Required) Yes No Partly What were you looking for? (Required) What were you hoping to accomplish by visiting our website? (Required) ×