Swallowing Tongue: Why It’s Impossible, and Seizure First Aid Healthline Health Conditions Health Conditions All Breast Cancer Cancer Care Caregiving for Alzheimer's Disease Chronic Kidney Disease Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Digestive Health Eye Health Heart Health Menopause Mental Health Migraine Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Parkinson’s Disease Psoriasis Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) Sleep Health Type 2 Diabetes Weight Management Condition Spotlight All Controlling Ulcerative Colitis Navigating Life with Bipolar Disorder Mastering Geographic Atrophy Managing Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wellness Topics All CBD Fitness Healthy Aging Hearing Mental Well-Being Nutrition Parenthood Recipes Sexual Health Skin Care Sleep Health Vitamins and Supplements Women's Wellness Product Reviews All At-Home Testing Men's Health Mental Health Nutrition Sleep Vitamins and Supplements Women's Health Featured Programs All Your Guide to Glucose Health Inflammation and Aging Cold & Flu Season Survival Guide She’s Good for Real Tools Featured Video Series Pill Identifier FindCare Drugs A-Z Medicare Plans by State Lessons All Crohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis Essentials Diabetes Nutrition High Cholesterol Taming Inflammation in Psoriasis Taming Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis Newsletters All Anxiety and Depression Digestive Health Heart Health Migraine Nutrition Edition Type 2 Diabetes Wellness Wire Lifestyle Quizzes Find a Diet Find Healthy Snacks Weight Management How Well Do You Sleep? Are You a Workaholic? Featured Health News All Medicare 2026 Changes Can 6-6-6 Walking Workout Help You Lose Weight? This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication 5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer Life Morning Coffee May Help You Live Longer This Just In 5 Tips for a Healthy Lifestyle How to Disinfect Your House After the Flu Best Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025 Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots? Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your Health Top Reads Best Multivitamins for Women Best Multivitamins for Men Best Online Therapy Services Online Therapy That Takes Insurance Buy Ozempic Online Mounjaro Overview Video Series Youth in Focus Healthy Harvest Through an Artist's Eye Future of Health Connect Find Your Bezzy Community Bezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app. All Breast Cancer Multiple Sclerosis Depression Migraine Type 2 Diabetes Psoriasis Follow us on social media Can't get enough? Connect with us for all things health. Subscribe Explore more in Causes & Risk Factors Management Treatment Symptoms Types Complications Home Remedies Prevention Diagnosis Diet Prognosis Related Conditions Surgery Epilepsy Related Topics Causes & Risk Factors Causes & Risk Factors Related Articles Causes in Adults Can COVID-19 Cause Seizures? Stress Genetics Epilepsy After a Concussion Triggers for Partial Onset Seizures Management Management Related Articles Recovery Seizure Threshold Alcohol Living Alone Staying Active In Pregnancy Treatment Treatment Related Articles Depakote Topamax Medications Oxcarbazepine Deep Brain Stimulation Symptoms Symptoms Related Articles Signs and Symptoms What It Feels Like Seizure Aura Types Types Related Articles Pseudoseizures Types Gelastic Seizures Post-Stroke Seizures Complex Partial Seizures Breakthrough Seizures Simple Partial Seizure Autonomic Seizures Tonic Seizure Heat-Induced Seizures Catamenial Myoclonic Seizures Clonic Seizures Photosensitive Epilepsy Temporal Lobe Epilepsy Focal Onset Seizures Atonic Seizures Types of Epilepsy Idiopathic Epilepsy Focal Epilepsy Tonic-Clonic Seizures Jeavons Syndrome Drug-Resistant Epilepsy Febrile Seizure? Dravet Syndrome Absence Epilepsy Complications Complications Related Articles Can It Kill You Seizures and Brain Damage Pain Swallow Your Tongue Convulsions Effects on the Body Todd's Paralysis Home Remedies Home Remedies Related Articles Natural Remedies Prevention Prevention Related Articles Prevention Diagnosis Diagnosis Related Articles Seizures Without Epilepsy MRIs EEGs Seizures vs. Seizure Disorders Diagnosis Diet Diet Related Articles Diet Keto Diet Prognosis Prognosis Related Articles Cure Outlook Dravet Syndrome Life Expectancy Related Conditions Related Conditions Related Articles Celiac Disease Link Surgery Surgery Related Articles Temporal Lobe Epilepsy Surgery Types of Brain Surgery Is It Possible to Swallow Your Tongue? Medically reviewed by Daniel Murrell, M.D. — Written by Erica Cirino — Updated on June 27, 2023 Seizure first aid Bottom line During a seizure, tissues in your mouth hold the tongue in place. There’s no such thing as swallowing your tongue. In fact, placing something in the mouth of a person having a seizure is dangerous. Share on Pinterest One of the first things you should do if you see someone having a seizure is to put something in their mouth to prevent them from swallowing their tongue, right? Wrong. This well-meaning action is actually a myth that could hurt the person you’re trying to help. It’s impossible for a person to swallow their tongue. While a person loses a lot of muscle control during a seizure, there is tissue in your mouth beneath your tongue that holds it in place. While a person’s tongue doesn’t move much during a seizure, there is a risk that they might bite their tongue. If anything is in their mouth while having a seizure, they could become seriously injured. It’s important not to try to put anything in a person’s mouth while they’re having a seizure to avoid harming them or making them choke on the object. Seizure first aid Seizures are relatively common. About 1 in 10 people will have one seizure during their lifetime, according to the Epilepsy Foundation of Michigan. There are several types of seizures, each with their own symptoms, though generally these symptoms overlap. Most seizures tend to be generalized tonic-clonic seizures (also called grand mal seizures). During these seizures, a person may experience : stiff or rigid muscles rapid and random muscle movements loss of consciousness injuries to the cheek or tongue due to biting that may come with loss of control of the body locked or stiff jaw loss of bladder and bowel control face that turns blue strange changes in taste, emotions, vision, and smell, usually before the seizure begins hallucinations tingling sensations disorientation crying out Knowing what to do if you see someone having a seizure can come in handy. If you see someone having a seizure, here’s what to do . As the seizure happens Help the person down to a safe position if they begin to seize while standing. Turn the person gently on one side to prevent aspiration (breathing foreign objects into airways). Move any possibly dangerous objects — anything hard or sharp — out of the area to help prevent injury. Place something such as a folded towel or jacket under the person’s head to keep it stable and safe. Remove the person’s eyeglasses if they’re wearing them. Loosen tie, collar, or jewelry around the person’s neck because these may make it hard for someone to breathe. Start timing the seizure. It’s important to call 911 or the local emergency number if the seizure lasts longer than five minutes. Look at the person’s neck or wrist to see if they’re wearing an emergency tag. Seek emergency help if indicated on their tag. Stay with the person until their seizure is over and they’re awake. Once they’re awake, it may take several minutes before they’re able to communicate again. After the seizure When the person has stopped seizing for several minutes, help them sit in a safe place. When they’re able to speak to you and understand you, explain to them calmly that they’ve had a seizure. Stay calm. Comfort the person and others around you who have witnessed the seizure. Ask if you can call a taxi or another person to help the person who had a seizure to get home safely. Never do these things when you find a person having a seizure Don’t try to hold or restrain the person. Don’t place anything in the person’s mouth. Don’t try to give CPR or mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. A person will usually start breathing on their own after a seizure. Don’t offer the person food or water until they’re completely alert. Should I call 911? Most people who have seizures don’t require emergency medical care. To determine if calling 911 or an emergency number is necessary, ask yourself these questions. If the answer to one or more of these questions is “yes,” call for help: Is this the person’s first seizure? Has this person had difficulty breathing or waking after the seizure? Has the seizure lasted more than five minutes? Has this person had a second seizure after the first one ended? Has the person been hurt during the seizure? Has the seizure happened in water? Does this person have a chronic health condition like diabetes or heart disease, or are they pregnant? Is this person wearing an emergency medical tag that requires me to call for help in the case of a seizure? The bottom line While many people have been taught that a person having a seizure might swallow their tongue, that’s simply not true. Remember never to put anything in the mouth of a person having a seizure because it could injure or choke them. Knowing what really happens during a seizure and how to react could be a big help to someone in the future. Because seizures are quite common, you might one day be called on to help. How we reviewed this article: Sources History Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy . Epilepsy and seizure facts. (n.d.). http://www.epilepsymichigan.org/page.php?id=358 Hamel D. (2015). Tongue-choking and otherepilepsy myths debunked. http://epilepsyontario.org/tongue-choking-and-other-epilepsy-myths-debunked/ O’Connor A. (2008). The claim: During a seizure,you can swallow your tongue. https://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/22/health/22real.html Seizure first aid. (2018). https://www.cdc.gov/epilepsy/about/first-aid.htm Share this article Medically reviewed by Daniel Murrell, M.D. — Written by Erica Cirino — Updated on June 27, 2023 Read this next Do Seizures Hurt? Medically reviewed by Nancy Hammond, M.D. Generally, having a seizure doesn't hurt. That’s because most seizures cause loss of awareness of what is happening. But that’s not always the case. READ MORE Focal Onset Seizures (Partial Seizures) Medically reviewed by Heidi Moawad, M.D. A seizure occurs when there's a surge in brain electrical activity. Learn about causes, symptoms, and more. READ MORE Seizures vs. Seizure Disorders Medically reviewed by University of Illinois A seizure is an abnormal surge of electrical activity in your brain. A seizure disorder involves many seizures. Read more on these two conditions. READ MORE Everything You Need to Know About Tonic-Clonic Seizures Medically reviewed by Seunggu Han, M.D. A tonic-clonic seizure, previously known as a grand mal seizure, is characterized by stiffness and jerking motions. Discover what to do if someone's… READ MORE Is it Possible to Cure Epilepsy? Medically reviewed by Nancy Hammond, M.D. While medications can limit or eliminate seizures in many people, sometimes epilepsy doesn’t respond to medications. Here's what you need to know. READ MORE What to Know About Idiopathic Epilepsy Medically reviewed by Heidi Moawad, M.D. Idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) is a group of epileptic syndromes with an unknown cause. IGE might be related to inherited genes. Learn more. READ MORE Best Foods to Eat for Epilepsy and Other Seizure Disorders Medically reviewed by Nancy Hammond, M.D. Depending on the type of seizures you experience, a doctor may recommend certain foods to eat and diets you might want to follow. Learn more. READ MORE What to Know About Epilepsy Seizures and Alcohol Consuming alcohol is a common seizure trigger for people with epilepsy. Learn how alcohol affects people with epilepsy and recommendations for… READ MORE © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Advertising Policy Health Topics Sitemap Medical Affairs Content Integrity Newsletters © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . © 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information . About Careers Advertise with us OUR BRANDS Healthline Medical News Today Greatist Psych Central Bezzy