Organ donation: Don't let these myths confuse you - Mayo Clinic This content does not have an English version. This content does not have an Arabic version. Skip to content Care at 
 Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact Us Patient & Visitor Guide Health 
 Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Mayo Clinic Health Letter & Books Mayo Clinic Health Letter & Books For Medical 
 Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Continuing Medical Education Research & Education 
 at Mayo Clinic Research Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant Programs Education Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to 
 Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to Give Make a Donation Request appointment Log in Search Menu Request appointment Donate Diseases & conditions Find a doctor Care at Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact Us Patient & Visitor Guide Health Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Mayo Clinic Health Letter & Books Mayo Clinic Health Letter & Books For Medical Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Continuing Medical Education Research & Education at Mayo Clinic Research Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant Programs Education Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to Give Make a Donation Appointments at Mayo Clinic Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations. Request Appointment Healthy Lifestyle Consumer health Print Sections Basics Consumer health basics Integrative medicine Medications In-Depth Expert Answers Multimedia Resources News From Mayo Clinic Products and services Organ donation: Don't let these myths confuse you Unsure about donating organs for transplant? Don't let wrong ideas keep you from saving lives. By Mayo Clinic Staff More than 100,000 people in the U.S. are waiting for an organ transplant. Sadly, many may never get the call saying that a donor organ has been found. Many may not get that second chance at life. Every day in the U.S., about 17 people die because there aren't enough donor organs for all who wait for a transplant. It can be hard to think about dying. It can be even harder to think about donating organs and tissue. But organ donors save lives. Here are answers to some common organ donation myths and concerns. Myth: If I agree to donate my organs, the hospital staff won't work as hard to save my life. Fact: When you go to the hospital for treatment, the health care team tries to save your life, not someone else's. You get the best care you can get. Myth: Maybe I won't really be dead when they sign my death certificate. Fact: This is a popular topic in tabloids. But in reality, people don't start to wiggle their toes after a health care provider says they're dead. In fact, people who have agreed to organ donation are given more tests to make sure they're dead than are those who aren't donating organs. These tests are done at no charge to their families. Myth: Organ donation is against my faith. Fact: Most major faiths accept organ donation. These include Catholicism, Islam, Buddhism, most branches of Judaism and most Protestant faiths. Some religions believe organ donation to be an act of charity. If you don't know where your faith stands on organ donation, ask a member of your clergy. Myth: I'm younger than 18. I'm too young to make this decision. Fact: Many states let people younger than 18 register as organ donors. But if you die before your 18th birthday, your parents or legal guardian will make the decision. If you want to be an organ donor, make sure your family is OK with your wishes. Remember, children, too, need organ transplants. They often need organs smaller than adult size. Myth: People who donate organs or tissues can't have an open-casket funeral. Fact: Donors' bodies are treated with care and respect. And they're dressed for burial. No one can see that they donated organs or tissues. Myth: I'm too old to donate. Nobody wants my organs. Fact: There's no standard cutoff age for donating organs. The decision to use your organs is based on the health of your organs, not age. Let the health care team decide at the time of your death whether your organs and tissues can be transplanted. Myth: I'm not in the best health. Nobody wants my organs or tissues. Fact: Very few medical conditions keep you from donating organs. Maybe you can't donate some organs, but other organs and tissues are fine. Again, let the health care team decide at the time of your death whether your organs and tissues can be transplanted. Myth: I'd like to donate one of my kidneys now. Can I do that if it's not going to a family member? Fact: Yes. Most living donations are between family members and friends. But you can choose to donate a kidney to a stranger, so long as you're a match. You also can donate other organs and tissues, such as a lung or part of a lung or liver. If you decide to become a living donor, the health care team at the transplant center asks a lot of questions. They want to make sure you know the risks. You'll have tests to make sure you're healthy and that the organ you want to donate is in good shape. The health care team also will want to be as sure as possible that the donation won't damage your health. Myth: Rich and famous people go to the top of the list when they need a donor organ. Fact: The rich and famous are treated the same as everyone else when it comes to organ donation. True, famous people might get a lot of press after a transplant. But who they are and how much money they have don't help them get an organ. A computer system and strict standards ensure fairness. Myth: My family will be charged if I donate my organs. Fact: The organ donor's family never pays for donation. The donor family pays for all the medical care given to save your life before your organs are donated. Sometimes families think those costs are for the organ donation. But the person who gets the organs for transplant pays the costs for removing the organs. Why you should think about donating organs Now that you have the facts, you can see that being an organ donor can have a big impact. And your donation helps not just the person getting the organ. By donating your organs and tissue after you die, you can save up to eight lives and improve 75 more. Many families say that knowing their loved one helped others helped them cope with their loss. Think about being an organ donor if you belong to an ethnic minority group. These include Black Americans, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, Native Americans, and Hispanics. People in these groups are more likely than white people to have certain illnesses that affect the kidneys, heart, lung, pancreas and liver. Some blood types are more common among minority groups. The blood type of the donor usually needs to match the blood type of the person getting an organ. So the need for minority donor organs is high. How to donate Becoming an organ donor is easy. Just do the following: Sign up with your state's donor registry. Most states have ways to sign up. Check the list at organdonor.gov. Mark your choice on your driver's license. Do this when you get or renew your license. Tell your family. Make sure your family knows you want to be an organ donor. Being on your state's organ donation registry and marking your choice on your driver's license or state ID are the best ways to make sure you become a donor. But telling your family also is important because hospitals ask next of kin before taking organs. However, hospitals don't need to ask for consent if you are 18 or older and are on your state's donor registry or have marked your driver's license or state ID card for organ donation. If you have named someone to decide about your health care for you if you are not able to do so, make sure that person knows that you want to be an organ donor. You also can include your wishes in a living will if you have one. But the will might not be read right at the time of your death. Connect with others News, connections and conversations for your health Transplant Page - Connect with others Transplant Page Transplant Group - Connect with others Transplant Group Answers to common organ donation questions and concerns. Click here for an infographic to learn more There is a problem with
                                information submitted for this request. Review/update the
                                information highlighted below and resubmit the form. From Mayo Clinic to your inbox Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview. Email Address 1 Error Email field is required Error Include a valid email address Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. We use the data you provide to deliver you the content you requested. To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, we may combine your email and website data with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, we will only use your protected health information as outlined in our Notice of Privacy Practices . You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email. Subscribe! Thank you for subscribing! You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox. Sorry something went wrong with your subscription Please, try again in a couple of minutes Retry Share Tweet May 04, 2023 Show references Organ donation statistics. Organdonor.gov. https://www.organdonor.gov/learn/organ-donation-statistics. Accessed Dec. 29, 2022. Franklin GF, et al. Evaluation of the potential deceased organ donor (adult). https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Dec. 29, 2022. Theological perspective on organ and tissue donation. United Network for Organ Sharing. https://unos.org/transplant/facts/theological-perspective-on-organ-and-tissue-donation/. Accessed Dec. 29, 2022. Equity access to transplant. United Network for Organ Sharing. https://insights.unos.org/equity-in-access/. Accessed Dec. 29, 2022. Frequently asked questions about organ donation for older adults. National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/frequently-asked-questions-about-organ-donation-older-adults. Accessed Dec. 29, 2022. Facts about organ donation. United Network for Organ Sharing. https://unos.org/transplant/facts/. Accessed Dec. 29, 2022. Donate organs while alive. Organdonor.gov. https://www.organdonor.gov/learn/process/living-donation. Accessed Dec. 29, 2022. See more In-depth Products and Services A Book: Live Younger Longer A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book A Book: Mayo Clinic Guide to Home Remedies A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health A Book: The Mayo Clinic Diet Bundle Assortment of Health Products from Mayo Clinic Store Newsletter: Mayo Clinic Health Letter — Digital Edition The Mayo Clinic Diet Online See also Can you spot a fake health article? Emergency essentials: Putting together a survival kit Emergency health information Kidney donation: Are there long-term risks? Living wills Myths about cancer causes Osteopathic medicine Personal health records Telehealth: Technology meets health care Show more related content Advertisement Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Opportunities Ad Choices Mayo Clinic Press Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press . NEW: Mayo Clinic Guide to Better Sleep Listen to Health Matters Podcast Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book . ART-20047529 Healthy Lifestyle Consumer health In-Depth Organ donation Dont let these myths confuse you Double your impact! Give Now! Your GivingTuesday gift can go 2X as far. Give Now! Find a doctor Explore careers Sign up for free e-newsletters About Mayo Clinic About this Site Contact Us Locations Health Information Policy Medicare Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Media Requests News Network Price Transparency Medical Professionals AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a Patient Businesses Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier Information Medical Professionals AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a Patient Businesses Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier Information Students Admissions Requirements Degree Programs Student & Faculty Portal Students Degree Programs Admissions Requirements Student & Faculty Portal Researchers Research Faculty Laboratories International Patients Appointments Financial Services Appointment Services Offices Charitable Care & Financial Assistance Community Health Needs Assessment Financial Assistance Documents – Arizona Financial Assistance Documents – Florida Financial Assistance Documents – Minnesota Follow Mayo Clinic X YouTube Facebook LinkedIn Instagram Get the Mayo Clinic app Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Digital Accessibility Statement Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage Cookies Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Digital Accessibility Statement Advertising and Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage Cookies Language: English English Español العربية 简体中文 © 1998-2025 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved. Language: English English Español العربية 简体中文