Is Killing a Praying Mantis Illegal? | Snopes.com Snopes Now available in the app store! Open Snopes Membership Search My Profile Logout Submit a Rumor Latest Trending News & Politics Entertainment Fact Checks Quiz Sections Latest Trending Fact Checks News Collections More Contact Us Submit a Rumor Archives Quiz FactBot Snopes App Newsletters About Us Categories News & Politics Entertainment Science & Technology Lifestyle Snopes Membership Login My Profile Logout Fact Check Is Killing a Praying Mantis Illegal? Since praying mantises are not humans or on the endangered species list, you can kill them without legal consequence. David Mikkelson Published Oct. 30, 1999 Image courtesy of Shutterstock Claim: Killing praying mantises is illegal in (parts of) the USA. Rating: False About this rating The belief that it is illegal to kill a praying mantis (a crime carrying a $50 fine as a punishment) has been floating around since the 1950s, and we have no idea where this bit of insectoid legal apocrypha came from: When I was growing up in New Jersey, I used to find praying mantises in our driveway and back yard every once in a while.  It was illegal in NJ to kill a praying mantis, as I remember. There is not (and never has been) any federal or state law proscribing the killing of praying mantises.  They're certainly useful insects that are best left alone since they eat a lot of other bugs we consider pests, but they're hardly an endangered species.  (If they were endangered, killing them would carry a fine far heftier than $50.)  Maybe because they're considered beneficial insects and have such an unusual posture (they're prayin' , fer gosh sake!)  people literally thought it a crime to kill them. Sources Morgan, Hal and Kerry Tucker. More Rumor! .
    New York: Penguin Books, 1987.   ISBN 0-14-009720-1   (pp. 126-127). By David Mikkelson David Mikkelson founded the site now known as snopes.com back in 1994. Recommendations Company About Us FAQs Contact Us Submit a Topic Navigate Home Search Archive Newsletters Random Sections Latest Top Fact Checks News Account Membership Donate Login Game FactBot Snopes App Like Us on Facebook Follow Us on X Follow Us on BlueSky Follow Us on Threads Follow Us on Mastodon Mastodon © 1995 - 2025  by Snopes, Inc. This material may not be reproduced without permission. Snopes and the Snopes.com logo are registered service marks of Snopes.com Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy DMCA Policy