Aspartame and Cancer Risk   | American Cancer Society Skip to main content × English English Español Esta página Página inicial PDFs by language Arabic (اللغة العربية) Chinese (简体中文) French (Français) Haitian Creole (Kreyòl Ayisyen) Hindi (जानकारी) Korean (한국어) Polish (język polski) Portuguese (Português) Russian (Русский) Spanish (Español) Tagalog (Tagalog) Ukrainian (Українська) Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) All Languages Contact Us 800.227.2345 Help Sign Up For Email Give In Honor & Memorial Donate All About Cancer Cancer Types Breast Cancer Colon & Rectal Cancer Lung Cancer Prostate Cancer Skin Cancer All Cancer Types Understanding Cancer What Is Cancer? Cancer Glossary Anatomy Gallery Risk & Prevention Genetics Tobacco HPV Diet & Physical Activity Sun Safety Cancer Risk Assessment Screening Diagnosis & Staging Signs & Symptoms Exams & Tests Staging Cancer Care Treatment Types Making Treatment Decisions Preparing for Treatment Side Effects Supportive Care Patient Navigation Financial & Insurance Matters End of Life Care Coping & Survivorship Caregivers & Family Childhood Cancer Adolescents & Young Adults Veterans For Health Professionals Cancer Connection Stories Bookstore Explore All About Cancer All About Cancer Back Explore All About Cancer Cancer Types Breast Cancer Colon & Rectal Cancer Lung Cancer Prostate Cancer Skin Cancer All Cancer Types Understanding Cancer What Is Cancer? Cancer Glossary Anatomy Gallery Risk & Prevention Genetics Tobacco HPV Diet & Physical Activity Sun Safety Cancer Risk Assessment Screening Diagnosis & Staging Signs & Symptoms Exams & Tests Staging Cancer Care Treatment Types Making Treatment Decisions Preparing for Treatment Side Effects Supportive Care Patient Navigation Financial & Insurance Matters End of Life Care Coping & Survivorship Caregivers & Family Childhood Cancer Adolescents & Young Adults Veterans For Health Professionals Cancer Connection Stories Bookstore Programs & Services Patient Programs Free Rides to Treatment Free Lodging During Treatment ACS CARES™ Free Smoking Cessation Support Connect with Survivors Breast Cancer Support Cancer Survivors Network Survivor Stories 24/7 Cancer Helpline Call us 1-800-227-2345 Resource Search Corporate Resources Explore Programs & Services Programs & Services Back Explore Programs & Services Patient Programs Free Rides to Treatment Free Lodging During Treatment ACS CARES™ Free Smoking Cessation Support Connect with Survivors Breast Cancer Support Cancer Survivors Network Survivor Stories 24/7 Cancer Helpline Call us 1-800-227-2345 Resource Search Corporate Resources Ways to Give Donate Online Become a Monthly Donor Donate Now Honor & Memorial Giving Make a Corporate Donation Top 5 Reasons to Become a Monthly Donor More Ways to Give Donate by Mail or Phone Donate Your Car Donate Your Stuff Donate DAF Donate FAQs Shop to Save Lives ACS Shop Events Shop EverYou Store Greeting Cards Discovery Shops Partner Promotions Philanthropy Wills, Trusts, and Legacy Giving Donor Advised Funds (DAF) IRA Charitable Rollover Stock Gifts Foundations Become a Partner Our Valued Partners Partner Promotions Corporate Resources Corporate & Workplace Giving Become a Corporate Partner Become a Corporate Donor Workplace Giving & Matching Funds Organize a Workplace Fundraiser Payroll Deductions Explore Ways to Give Ways to Give Back Explore Ways to Give Donate Online Become a Monthly Donor Donate Now Honor & Memorial Giving Make a Corporate Donation Top 5 Reasons to Become a Monthly Donor More Ways to Give Donate by Mail or Phone Donate Your Car Donate Your Stuff Donate DAF Donate FAQs Shop to Save Lives ACS Shop Events Shop EverYou Store Greeting Cards Discovery Shops Partner Promotions Philanthropy Wills, Trusts, and Legacy Giving Donor Advised Funds (DAF) IRA Charitable Rollover Stock Gifts Foundations Become a Partner Our Valued Partners Partner Promotions Corporate Resources Corporate & Workplace Giving Become a Corporate Partner Become a Corporate Donor Workplace Giving & Matching Funds Organize a Workplace Fundraiser Payroll Deductions Get Involved Fundraising Events Relay For Life Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walk Endurance Events Galas, Balls, and Parties Golf Tournaments Start a Fundraiser Create Your Own Fundraiser Fundraise on Facebook Youth Sports Virtual Challenges Volunteer Be an Advocate Opportunities for Organizations ACS GenNow Network Donate Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Explore Get Involved Get Involved Back Explore Get Involved Fundraising Events Relay For Life Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walk Endurance Events Galas, Balls, and Parties Golf Tournaments Start a Fundraiser Create Your Own Fundraiser Fundraise on Facebook Youth Sports Virtual Challenges Volunteer Be an Advocate Opportunities for Organizations ACS GenNow Network Donate Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Our Research & Journals Highlights of ACS Cancer Research ACS Research News Apply for an ACS Grant Grant Application and Review Process Currently Funded Grants Research We Conduct Cancer Facts & Statistics ACS Screening Guidelines CPS-3: Cancer Prevention Study-3 VOICES of Black Women Study Cancer Research Training For High School Students For College Undergraduates For Post-Baccalaureate Fellows ACS Research Team Bios Early Cancer Detection Science Extramural Discovery Science Population Science Surveillance, Prevention, & Health Services Research ACS Medical Journals Research Tools Cancer Atlas US Tobacco Atlas Cancer Statistics Center Glossary for Nonscientists Research Events Jiler Conference Eating Grains May Lower the Risk of Advanced Prostate Cancer Explore Our Research Our Research & Journals Back Explore Our Research Highlights of ACS Cancer Research ACS Research News Apply for an ACS Grant Grant Application and Review Process Currently Funded Grants Research We Conduct Cancer Facts & Statistics ACS Screening Guidelines CPS-3: Cancer Prevention Study-3 VOICES of Black Women Study Cancer Research Training For High School Students For College Undergraduates For Post-Baccalaureate Fellows ACS Research Team Bios Early Cancer Detection Science Extramural Discovery Science Population Science Surveillance, Prevention, & Health Services Research ACS Medical Journals Research Tools Cancer Atlas US Tobacco Atlas Cancer Statistics Center Glossary for Nonscientists Research Events Jiler Conference Eating Grains May Lower the Risk of Advanced Prostate Cancer About Us Who We Are 110 Years of Wins Our Mission Our Core Values Our Valued Partners Our History Our Leadership Financials & Governance What We Do Encourage Prevention Provide Support Address Cancer Disparities Foster Innovation Support in Your State Cancer Action Network Global Cancer Programs Contact Us Employment Opportunities ACS News Room Sign Up for Email Sign Up for Text Messages We couldn’t do it without the help of our partners Explore About Us About Us Back Explore About Us Who We Are 110 Years of Wins Our Mission Our Core Values Our Valued Partners Our History Our Leadership Financials & Governance What We Do Encourage Prevention Provide Support Address Cancer Disparities Foster Innovation Support in Your State Cancer Action Network Global Cancer Programs Contact Us Employment Opportunities ACS News Room Sign Up for Email Sign Up for Text Messages We couldn’t do it without the help of our partners Search https://searchapi.cancer.org Search Use double-quotes ("") around a phrase for an exact result Give In Honor & Memorial Sign Up For Email Sign Up For Text Messages All About Cancer Cancer Types Breast Cancer Colon & Rectal Cancer Lung Cancer Prostate Cancer Skin Cancer All Cancer Types Understanding Cancer What Is Cancer? Cancer Glossary Anatomy Gallery Risk & Prevention Genetics Tobacco HPV Diet & Physical Activity Sun Safety Cancer Risk Assessment Screening Diagnosis & Staging Signs & Symptoms Exams & Tests Staging Cancer Care Treatment Types Making Treatment Decisions Preparing for Treatment Side Effects Supportive Care Patient Navigation Financial & Insurance Matters End of Life Care Coping & Survivorship Caregivers & Family Childhood Cancer Adolescents & Young Adults Veterans For Health Professionals Cancer Connection Stories Bookstore Explore All About Cancer All About Cancer Back Explore All About Cancer Cancer Types Breast Cancer Colon & Rectal Cancer Lung Cancer Prostate Cancer Skin Cancer All Cancer Types Understanding Cancer What Is Cancer? Cancer Glossary Anatomy Gallery Risk & Prevention Genetics Tobacco HPV Diet & Physical Activity Sun Safety Cancer Risk Assessment Screening Diagnosis & Staging Signs & Symptoms Exams & Tests Staging Cancer Care Treatment Types Making Treatment Decisions Preparing for Treatment Side Effects Supportive Care Patient Navigation Financial & Insurance Matters End of Life Care Coping & Survivorship Caregivers & Family Childhood Cancer Adolescents & Young Adults Veterans For Health Professionals Cancer Connection Stories Bookstore Programs & Services Patient Programs Free Rides to Treatment Free Lodging During Treatment ACS CARES™ Free Smoking Cessation Support Connect with Survivors Breast Cancer Support Cancer Survivors Network Survivor Stories 24/7 Cancer Helpline Call us 1-800-227-2345 Resource Search Corporate Resources Explore Programs & Services Programs & Services Back Explore Programs & Services Patient Programs Free Rides to Treatment Free Lodging During Treatment ACS CARES™ Free Smoking Cessation Support Connect with Survivors Breast Cancer Support Cancer Survivors Network Survivor Stories 24/7 Cancer Helpline Call us 1-800-227-2345 Resource Search Corporate Resources Ways to Give Donate Online Become a Monthly Donor Donate Now Honor & Memorial Giving Make a Corporate Donation Top 5 Reasons to Become a Monthly Donor More Ways to Give Donate by Mail or Phone Donate Your Car Donate Your Stuff Donate DAF Donate FAQs Shop to Save Lives ACS Shop Events Shop EverYou Store Greeting Cards Discovery Shops Partner Promotions Philanthropy Wills, Trusts, and Legacy Giving Donor Advised Funds (DAF) IRA Charitable Rollover Stock Gifts Foundations Become a Partner Our Valued Partners Partner Promotions Corporate Resources Corporate & Workplace Giving Become a Corporate Partner Become a Corporate Donor Workplace Giving & Matching Funds Organize a Workplace Fundraiser Payroll Deductions Explore Ways to Give Ways to Give Back Explore Ways to Give Donate Online Become a Monthly Donor Donate Now Honor & Memorial Giving Make a Corporate Donation Top 5 Reasons to Become a Monthly Donor More Ways to Give Donate by Mail or Phone Donate Your Car Donate Your Stuff Donate DAF Donate FAQs Shop to Save Lives ACS Shop Events Shop EverYou Store Greeting Cards Discovery Shops Partner Promotions Philanthropy Wills, Trusts, and Legacy Giving Donor Advised Funds (DAF) IRA Charitable Rollover Stock Gifts Foundations Become a Partner Our Valued Partners Partner Promotions Corporate Resources Corporate & Workplace Giving Become a Corporate Partner Become a Corporate Donor Workplace Giving & Matching Funds Organize a Workplace Fundraiser Payroll Deductions Get Involved Fundraising Events Relay For Life Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walk Endurance Events Galas, Balls, and Parties Golf Tournaments Start a Fundraiser Create Your Own Fundraiser Fundraise on Facebook Youth Sports Virtual Challenges Volunteer Be an Advocate Opportunities for Organizations ACS GenNow Network Donate Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Explore Get Involved Get Involved Back Explore Get Involved Fundraising Events Relay For Life Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walk Endurance Events Galas, Balls, and Parties Golf Tournaments Start a Fundraiser Create Your Own Fundraiser Fundraise on Facebook Youth Sports Virtual Challenges Volunteer Be an Advocate Opportunities for Organizations ACS GenNow Network Donate Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Our Research & Journals Highlights of ACS Cancer Research ACS Research News Apply for an ACS Grant Grant Application and Review Process Currently Funded Grants Research We Conduct Cancer Facts & Statistics ACS Screening Guidelines CPS-3: Cancer Prevention Study-3 VOICES of Black Women Study Cancer Research Training For High School Students For College Undergraduates For Post-Baccalaureate Fellows ACS Research Team Bios Early Cancer Detection Science Extramural Discovery Science Population Science Surveillance, Prevention, & Health Services Research ACS Medical Journals Research Tools Cancer Atlas US Tobacco Atlas Cancer Statistics Center Glossary for Nonscientists Research Events Jiler Conference Eating Grains May Lower the Risk of Advanced Prostate Cancer Explore Our Research Our Research & Journals Back Explore Our Research Highlights of ACS Cancer Research ACS Research News Apply for an ACS Grant Grant Application and Review Process Currently Funded Grants Research We Conduct Cancer Facts & Statistics ACS Screening Guidelines CPS-3: Cancer Prevention Study-3 VOICES of Black Women Study Cancer Research Training For High School Students For College Undergraduates For Post-Baccalaureate Fellows ACS Research Team Bios Early Cancer Detection Science Extramural Discovery Science Population Science Surveillance, Prevention, & Health Services Research ACS Medical Journals Research Tools Cancer Atlas US Tobacco Atlas Cancer Statistics Center Glossary for Nonscientists Research Events Jiler Conference Eating Grains May Lower the Risk of Advanced Prostate Cancer About Us Who We Are 110 Years of Wins Our Mission Our Core Values Our Valued Partners Our History Our Leadership Financials & Governance What We Do Encourage Prevention Provide Support Address Cancer Disparities Foster Innovation Support in Your State Cancer Action Network Global Cancer Programs Contact Us Employment Opportunities ACS News Room Sign Up for Email Sign Up for Text Messages We couldn’t do it without the help of our partners Explore About Us About Us Back Explore About Us Who We Are 110 Years of Wins Our Mission Our Core Values Our Valued Partners Our History Our Leadership Financials & Governance What We Do Encourage Prevention Provide Support Address Cancer Disparities Foster Innovation Support in Your State Cancer Action Network Global Cancer Programs Contact Us Employment Opportunities ACS News Room Sign Up for Email Sign Up for Text Messages We couldn’t do it without the help of our partners Contact Us 800.227.2345 Help English English Español Esta página Página inicial PDFs by language Arabic (اللغة العربية) Chinese (简体中文) French (Français) Haitian Creole (Kreyòl Ayisyen) Hindi (जानकारी) Korean (한국어) Polish (język polski) Portuguese (Português) Russian (Русский) Spanish (Español) Tagalog (Tagalog) Ukrainian (Українська) Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) All Languages Donate https://searchapi.cancer.org Use double-quotes ("") around a phrase for an exact result Help Our 24/7 cancer helpline provides information and answers for people dealing with cancer. We can connect you with trained cancer information specialists who will answer questions about a cancer diagnosis and provide guidance and a compassionate ear. Start Live Chat Live Chat available weekdays, 7:00 am - 6:30 pm CT Call us at 1-800-227-2345 Available any time of day or night Our highly trained specialists are available 24/7 via phone and on weekdays can assist through online chat. We connect patients, caregivers, and family members with essential services and resources at every step of their cancer journey. Ask us how you can get involved and support the fight against cancer. Some of the topics we can assist with include: Referrals to patient-related programs or resources Donations, website, or event-related assistance Tobacco-related topics Volunteer opportunities Cancer Information For medical questions, we encourage you to review our information with your doctor. Home All About Cancer Cancer Risk and Prevention Chemicals Aspartame Cancer Risk and Prevention Understanding the Causes of Cancer Is Cancer Contagious? Determining if Something Is a Carcinogen Known and Probable Human Carcinogens Cancer Clusters Cancer Warning Labels Based on California's Proposition 65 Common Questions About Causes of Cancer Lifetime Risk of Developing or Dying From Cancer Cancer Facts: Prevention and Screening Cancer Facts for Men Cancer Facts for Gay and Bisexual Men Cancer Facts for Women Cancer Facts for Lesbian and Bisexual Women How to Interpret News About Ways to Prevent Cancer How to Interpret News About Cancer Causes Tobacco How to Quit Tobacco Why People Start Smoking and Why It’s Hard to Stop Reasons to Quit Smoking Benefits of Quitting Tobacco If You Have Cancer Planning Your Quit Day Quitting Smoking or Smokeless Tobacco Quitting E-cigarettes (Vapes, Vape Pens) Nicotine Replacement Therapy Prescription Medicines to Help You Quit Tobacco Dealing with the Mental Part of Tobacco Addiction Help for Cravings and Tough Situations Talking With Your Cancer Care Team About Tobacco Use How to Help Someone Quit Smoking Health Benefits of Quitting Smoking Over Time Are There Other Ways to Quit Tobacco? Staying Tobacco-free After You Quit Harmful Chemicals in Tobacco Products E-cigarettes and Vaping Keeping Your Children Tobacco-free The Great American Smokeout Great American Smokeout Event Tools and Resources History of the Great American Smokeout Empowered to Quit Health Risks of Smoking Tobacco Health Risks of Smokeless Tobacco Health Risks of Secondhand Smoke Is Any Type of Tobacco Product Safe? Diet, Physical Activity, and Healthy Living American Cancer Society Guideline for Diet and Physical Activity for Cancer Prevention Lifestyle and Cancer Prevention How Diet and Physical Activity Impact Cancer Risk Excess Body Weight and Cancer Risk Alcohol Use and Cancer Sleep and Cancer Risk Eat Healthy Healthy Foods to Keep in Your Kitchen Healthy Recipes Eating Healthy on the Go Eating at Restaurants and Social Events Calorie Counter Understanding Portion Sizes Low-Fat Foods Understanding Food Labels and Terms Get Active, Stay Active, Stay Healthy Cardio Exercise Strength Exercises and Weight Training Exercising at Your Desk or at Home Target Heart Rate Calculator Calories Burned Calculator Healthy Eating, Active Living Videos Sun and UV Exposure UV (Ultraviolet) Radiation and Cancer Risk Sun Safety and Vitamin D What Factors Affect UV Risk? Is It Safe to Get a Fake (Sunless) Tan? How to Protect Your Skin from UV Rays How to Do a Skin Self-Exam Sun Safety Quiz Sun Safety Videos How to Use Sunscreen HPV What Is HPV (Human Papillomavirus)? Types of HPV HPV Signs and Symptoms How to Protect Against HPV HPV Testing Prevent Cancer with the HPV Vaccine Cancers Linked with HPV HPV Vaccines Genetics Genetic Testing for Cancer Risk Understanding Genetic Testing for Cancer Risk What Happens During Genetic Testing for Cancer Risk? Talking with Family Members About Genetic Testing What Should I Know Before Getting Genetic Testing? Family Cancer Syndromes Understanding Family Cancer Syndromes Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS) Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHD) Carney Complex (CNC) Cowden Syndrome Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) Familial GIST Syndrome Hereditary Retinoblastoma (RB1) Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) Neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF2) MUTYH-Associated Polyposis (or Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Type 2) Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Lynch Syndrome Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC) Radiation Exposure X-rays and Gamma Rays What Are X-rays and Gamma Rays? Do X-rays and Gamma Rays Cause Health Problems Other than Cancer? Can I Avoid or Limit My Exposure to X-rays and Gamma Rays? Do X-rays and Gamma Rays Cause Cancer? How Are People Exposed to X-rays and Gamma Rays? Radiofrequency (RF) Radiation Power Lines, Electrical Devices, and Extremely Low Frequency Radiation Cellular (Cell) Phones Cell Phone Towers Smart Meters Radon Chemicals Acrylamide Antiperspirants Arsenic Asbestos Aspartame Benzene Cosmetics Diesel Exhaust Formaldehyde Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone (rBGH) PFOA, PFOS, and Related PFAS Chemicals Talcum Powder Water Fluoridation Military Burn Pits Firefighting Agent Orange Hair Dyes Infections Infections that Can Lead to Cancer Can Infections Cause Cancer? Viruses that Can Lead to Cancer Bacteria that Can Lead to Cancer Parasites that Can Lead to Cancer HIV Infection and Cancer HIV and Cancer What Are HIV and AIDS? Medical Treatments Abortion and Breast Cancer Risk DES Exposure: Questions and Answers Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cancer Risk ACS CancerRisk360 Back Download Section as PDF Aspartame and Cancer Risk On this page [ show ] [ hide ] What is aspartame? Does aspartame cause cancer? Is aspartame regulated? Can aspartame be avoided? To learn more What is aspartame? Aspartame is an artificial sweetener has been in use in the United States since the early 1980s. It is used in many foods and beverages because it is much sweeter than sugar, so much less of it can be used to give the same level of sweetness. Aspartame is commonly used as a tabletop sweetener, as a sweetener in prepared foods and beverages, and in recipes that don’t require too much heating (since heat breaks down aspartame). It can also be found as a flavoring in some medicines, chewing gums, and toothpastes. Does aspartame cause cancer? Concerns about aspartame causing a number of health problems, including cancer, have been around for many years. Some of the concerns about cancer stem from the results of studies in lab rats published by a group of Italian researchers in the late 2000s, which suggested aspartame might increase the risk of some blood-related cancers (leukemias and lymphomas) and other types of cancer. However, these studies had some limitations that made their results hard to interpret. The results of epidemiologic studies (studies of groups of people) of possible links between aspartame and cancer (including blood-related cancers) have not been consistent for most cancers.Some studies have suggested a possible link, but others have not. In general, the American Cancer Society does not determine if something causes cancer (that is, if it is a carcinogen ), but we do look to other respected organizations for help with this. World Health Organization (WHO) International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) IARC is the cancer research agency of the WHO. One of its major roles is to identify causes of cancer. IARC classifies aspartame as “possibly carcinogenic to humans” (Group 2B), based on limited evidence it might cause cancer (specifically liver cancer) in people. IARC also notes there is limited evidence for cancer in lab animals and limited evidence related to possible mechanisms for it causing cancer. It’s important to know that IARC classifications are based on the strength of the evidence of whether something can cause cancer in humans, not how likely it is to cause cancer. The Group 2B classification is the third highest out of 4 levels, and it is generally used either when there is limited, but not convincing, evidence for cancer in humans, or when there is convincing evidence for cancer in lab animals, but not both. To learn more about the IARC classifications, see Determining if Something Is a Carcinogen and Known and Probable Human Carcinogens . Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) JECFA is an international expert committee run jointly by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the WHO. One of its main roles is to evaluate the safety of food additives. It considers all possible health impacts, including cancer. JECFA assesses the risk that a specific type of harm (such as cancer) will occur in certain situations, considering how, how often, and how much people might be exposed to a food additive. After completing a dietary exposure assessment, JECFA has concluded that “the evidence of an association between aspartame consumption and cancer in humans is not convincing.” Based on current dietary exposure estimates, JECFA has concluded that dietary exposure to aspartame does not pose a health concern. Overall conclusions Commenting on the assessments from both the IARC and JECFA, the Director of the Department of Nutrition and Food Safety for WHO has concluded, “The assessments of aspartame have indicated that, while safety is not a major concern at the doses which are commonly used, potential effects have been described that need to be investigated by more and better studies.” While the science is still evolving, the American Cancer Society supports the call from IARC and other organizations for more research on aspartame and other artificial sweeteners. We also continue to conduct our own studies to better understand their possible link with cancer, as well as to help lower cancer risk and improve prevention efforts and care in other areas. Food regulatory authorities While it’s not the main role of food regulatory authorities to determine if something causes cancer, they do look at the evidence for this when determining if foods (and food additives) are safe to eat. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for the safety of ingredients added to foods in the United States, including artificial sweeteners like aspartame (see "Is aspartame regulated?" below). The FDA has stated: “Scientific evidence has continued to support the FDA’s conclusion that aspartame is safe for the general population when made under good manufacturing practices and used under the approved conditions of use.” European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) regulates food additives in the European Union. After completing a risk assessment on aspartame in 2013, the EFSA stated, “Aspartame and its breakdown products are safe for human consumption at current levels of exposure.” Is aspartame regulated? In the United States, artificial sweeteners such as aspartame are regulated by the FDA. These products must be tested for safety and approved by the FDA before they can be used. The FDA also sets an acceptable daily intake (ADI) for each sweetener, which is the maximum amount considered safe to consume each day during a person's lifetime. The FDA has set the ADI for aspartame at 50 milligrams per kilogram (1 kg=2.2 lb) of body weight per day (50 mg/kg/day). Both JECFA and the EFSA recommend a slightly lower ADI for aspartame, at 40 mg/kg/day. To help put these levels in perspective, the FDA estimates that a person weighing 60 kg (132 lb) would have to consume about 75 packets of aspartame in a day to reach the upper end of the ADI of 50 mg/kg/day. Similarly, a person weighing 70 kg (154 lb) would have to consume at least 9–14 cans of diet soda per day (depending on the level of aspartame in each can) to exceed the ADI of 40 mg/kg/day used by JECFA/EFSA. Can aspartame be avoided? Aspartame hasn’t been linked conclusively to any specific health problems, other than for people with phenylketonuria (PKU). This is a rare genetic disorder (present at birth) in which the body can't break down phenylalanine, an amino acid found in many foods (and in aspartame). This is why any products (including medicines) containing aspartame must carry the warning “PHENYLKETONURICS: CONTAINS PHENYLALANINE.” For other people who want to avoid aspartame, the easiest way to do this is to look for this same warning, or to check the ingredient labels before buying or eating foods or drinks. If aspartame is in the product it will be listed. To learn more Along with the American Cancer Society, other sources of information about aspartame include: International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Aspartame hazard and risk assessment results released: www.iarc.who.int/featured-news/aspartame-hazard-and-risk-assessment-results-released European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Aspartame: www.efsa.europa.eu/en/topics/topic/aspartame EFSA Explains the Safety of Aspartame: www.efsa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/corporate_publications/files/factsheetaspartame.pdf US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Aspartame and Other Sweeteners in Food: www.fda.gov/food/food-additives-petitions/aspartame-and-other-sweeteners-food National Cancer Institute (NCI) Artificial Sweeteners and Cancer: www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/diet/artificial-sweeteners-fact-sheet Written by References The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep knowledge of cancer care as well as editors and translators with extensive experience in medical writing. Debras C, Chazelas E, Srour B, et al. Artificial sweeteners and cancer risk: Results from the NutriNet-Santé population-based cohort study. PLoS Medicine. 2022; 19(3):e1003950. European Food Safety Authority. Aspartame. 2023. Accessed at https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/topics/topic/aspartame on July 6, 2023. European Food Safety Authority. EFSA completes full risk assessment on aspartame and concludes it is safe at current levels of exposure. 2013. Accessed at https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/press/news/131210 on July 6, 2023. European Food Safety Authority ANS Panel (EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food), 2013. Scientific Opinion on the re-evaluation of aspartame (E 951) as a food additive. EFSA Journal . 2013;11(12):3496. International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). Summary of findings of the evaluation of aspartame at the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs Programme’s 134th Meeting, 6–13 June 2023 and the JOINT FAO/WHO EXPERT COMMITTEE ON FOOD ADDITIVES (JECFA) 96th meeting, 27 June–6 July 2023. Accessed at https://www.iarc.who.int/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Summary_of_findings_Aspartame.pdf on July 13, 2023. National Cancer Institute. Artificial Sweeteners and Cancer. 2023. Accessed at https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/diet/artificial-sweeteners-fact-sheet on July 6, 2023. Riboli E, Beland FA, Lachenmeier DW, et al. Carcinogenicity of aspartame, methyleugenol, and isoeugenol. Lancet Oncol. July 2023. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(23)00341-8. US Food and Drug Administration. Food Additives Permitted for Direct Addition to Food for Human Consumption; Aspartame. Federal Register. 1996; 61(126):33654-33656. Accessed at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1996-06-28/pdf/96-16522.pdf on July 7, 2023. US Food and Drug Administration. High-Intensity Sweeteners. 2017. Accessed at https://www.fda.gov/food/food-additives-petitions/high-intensity-sweeteners on July 7, 2023. Last Revised: July 25, 2023 American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For reprint requests, please see our Content Usage Policy . American Cancer Society Emails Sign up to stay up-to-date with news, valuable information, and ways to get involved with the American Cancer Society. Sign Up for Email Help us end cancer as we know it, for everyone. Donate with Confidence Cancer information, answers, and hope. Available every minute of every day. Follow Us Call Us 800.227.2345 Sign Up for Email Sign Up for Text Messages Cancer Information Cancer Prevention & Detection Understanding Cancer Signs & Symptoms of Cancer Cancer Treatment ACS Research Highlights Cancer Facts & Statistics Cancer Connection Stories Glossary For Health Care Professionals ACS Fundraisers Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walks Relay For Life Events American Cancer Society on Campus Coaches vs. Cancer Galas, Balls & Parties Ways to Give Memorial Giving Planned Giving Philanthropy Donate a Car Donate by Mail or Phone About ACS Contact Us ACS in Your Community Employment Information for Suppliers Report Fraud or Abuse Sign Up for Email Sign Up for Text Messages Our Research Cancer Action Network Global Health Policies Our Volunteers About ACS Programs & Services Lodging During Treatment Rides To Treatment Breast Cancer Support Hair Loss and Post-surgical Products Connecting Cancer Survivors Patient and Caregiver Support More ACS Sites Bookstore Cancer Atlas Cancer Statistics Center ACS News Room American Cancer Society Roundtables Volunteer Community FAQs Site Map Privacy Policy Privacy Rights Health Privacy Policy Accessibility Terms of Use State Fundraising Notices © {currentyear} American Cancer Society, Inc. All rights reserved. The American Cancer Society is a qualified 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. Tax ID Number: 13-1788491. Cancer.org is provided courtesy of the Leo and Gloria Rosen family.