NAFF Definition & Meaning - Merriam-Webster Menu Toggle Merriam-Webster Logo Chatbot Chatbot Games Word of the Day Grammar Word Finder Slang New Newsletters Wordplay Rhymes Thesaurus Join MWU More Games Word of the Day Grammar Wordplay Slang Rhymes Word Finder Newsletters New Thesaurus Join MWU Shop Books Merch Log In Username My Words Recents Account Log Out Est. 1828 Dictionary Definition Definition Word History Rhymes Entries Near Related Articles Cite this Entry Citation Share Show more Show more Citation Share Save Word To save this word, you'll need to log in. Log In naff adjective ˈnaf British,  informal : lacking in style or good taste : vulgar and unfashionable I was going to get a pair of leather jeans as well, but it was too expensive and anyway, leather pants look naff , as I discovered later. — Melvin Burgess , Smack , 1996 … the terrifying door girl Scarlett sat guard and held up a hand mirror to anyone she considered too naff to enter, with the withering line "Would you let yourself in?" — Hamish Bowles , Vogue , November 2012 Word History Etymology perhaps borrowed from Polari (English argot used by theatrical and circus performers and in certain gay subcultures, derived in part from Italian); ulterior origin uncertain Note: A summary of hypotheses on the origin of naff can be found in the Oxford English Dictionary , on-line third edition (this entry updated June, 2003). The putative Polari phrase naff omi "a dreary man," unattributed in the Oxford etymology, is apparently from a communication by the comic actor Kenneth Williams, in 1980, to Paul Beale, the editor of Eric Partridge's A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English , 8th edition, 1984 (see p. 775). First Known Use 1966, in the meaning defined above Time Traveler The first known use of naff was 
                                        in 1966 See more words from the same year The Ultimate Dictionary Awaits Expand your vocabulary and dive deeper into language with Merriam-Webster Unabridged . Expanded definitions Detailed etymologies Advanced search tools All ad-free Discover what makes Merriam-Webster Unabridged the essential choice
        for true word lovers. Start Your Free Trial Now Rhymes for naff calf chaff gaff graff graph haff half laugh raff staff staph autograph See All Rhymes for naff Browse Nearby Words naeve naff NAFTA See all Nearby Words Articles Related to naff Another Great British Vocabulary Quiz,... A double-decker quiz with words from across the pond Cite this Entry Style MLA Chicago APA Merriam-Webster “Naff.” Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary , Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/naff. Accessed 23 Nov. 2025. Copy Citation Share Love words? Need even more definitions? Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free! Merriam-Webster unabridged More from Merriam-Webster Can you solve 4 words at once? Play Play Can you solve 4 words at once? Play Play Word of the Day desolate See Definitions and Examples » Get Word of the Day daily email! Popular in Grammar & Usage See More 'Affect' vs. 'Effect' Putting Adjectives in the Right Order The Difference Between 'i.e.' and 'e.g.' What’s the difference between ‘cemetery’ and ‘graveyard’? Democracy or Republic: What's the difference? See More Popular in Wordplay See More Great Big List of Beautiful and Useless Words, Vol. 5 13 Wonderful Words That You're Not Using (Yet) Ten More Words from Taylor Swift Songs Birds Say the Darndest Things Words That Turned 100 in 2025 See More Popular See More 'Affect' vs. 'Effect' Great Big List of Beautiful and Useless Words, Vol. 5 13 Wonderful Words That You're Not Using (Yet) See More Games & Quizzes See All Quordle Can you solve 4 words at once? Play Blossom Pick the best words! Play The Missing Letter A daily crossword with a twist Play Name That Thing MegaQuiz: Vol. 2 Test your visual vocabulary! Take the quiz See All Merriam Webster Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox! Help About Us Advertising Info Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram © 2025 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated