How Rainy Is Seattle? It's Not Even in the Top 30 of Major U.S. Cities | American Council on Science and Health Skip to main content search Link to Facebook page Link to X Link to YouTube channel Link to flipboard Link to RSS Main navigation Home About About ACSH Financials Our Team Video Donate Publications Media/Contact Subscribe Write For Us How Rainy Is Seattle? It's Not Even in the Top 30 of Major U.S. Cities email facebook twitter linkedin pocket reddit print By Alex Berezow, PhD — Jan 16, 2019 Related content: The 10 Most Livable (and Unlivable) Cities in the World ACSH in the Media: Steamy Summer Edition How to Defeat the Fear Industry Seattle’s Soda Tax Linked to Childhood BMI Decline, But Obesity Increased. Why? Seattle Is Dying: HIV Outbreak Hits Homeless Given Seattle's solid reputation for rain, it must be one of the wettest cities in America, right? Actually, it's not even close. As it turns out, among the nation's 50 largest cities in terms of precipitation Seattle doesn't even rank in the top half. However, it is tied with Buffalo for the nation's dreariest. How much does it rain in Seattle? It rains enough that a company (based in Seattle, of course) developed a product called a RainGlobe , which is like a snow globe, except it rains inside. (I bought two of them and thought they were pretty cool until the water turned yellow.) Given Seattle's rainy reputation, it must be one of the wettest cities in America, right? Wrong. Not even close. In fact, Seattle doesn't even rank in the top 30 for precipitation among the nation's 50 largest cities. To perform this analysis, I combined data from two sources: (1) Wikipedia's page on the 383 metropolitan statistical areas in the United States; and (2) a website called Current Results that features aggregated weather data. The first chart below depicts the wettest cities ranked by total precipitation: At 37.7 inches of precipitation annually, Seattle ranks 32nd among the nation's 50 largest cities. Notice that most of the cities with more rainfall are located east of the Mississippi River, as shown in the map below made by climatologist Brian Brettschneider. Source : Brian Brettschneider How is it possible that Seattle has such a rainy reputation if it's not even remotely one of the wettest cities in the country? Well, the rain in Seattle is sort of like the mist in the grocery produce aisle. It rarely rains hard; instead, it has a (seemingly) never-ending drizzle that keeps the city wet almost all-year round. (The dry season is the summer, which lasts from roughly July to early October.) So, Seattle's reputation is totally deserved because of the number of days in which it rains. Yet, Seattle only comes in at #5 by this ranking. Believe it or not, there are cities with even more rainy (or snowy) days: Buffalo, Portland, Cleveland, and Pittsburgh. Portland didn't surprise me. It's Seattle's "little brother" down the road, and the weather there is very similar to ours. But Buffalo, Cleveland, and Pittsburgh? Really? Apparently, those cities are just about as dreary as Seattle. Climatologist Brian Brettschneider also made what he called the " Dreariness Index ," which factors in total precipitation, the number of wet days, and cloudiness. By this metric, Seattle and Buffalo are tied for #1, while Portland and Pittsburgh are tied for #2. Source : Brian Brettschneider Yes, Seattle is a dreary place -- but I like it that way. What can I say? I'm a pluviophile . Tags: rain precipitation weather climate Seattle United States cities Category Other Science News Subscribe to our newsletter Email * required Name Newsletter Frequency Both Dispatch and Weekend Edition Dispatch only Weekend Edition Only No newsletter email facebook twitter linkedin pocket reddit print Alex Berezow, PhD Former Vice President of Scientific Communications Dr. Alex Berezow is a PhD microbiologist, science writer, and public speaker who specializes in the debunking of junk science for the American Council on Science and Health. He is also a member of the USA Today Board of Contributors and a featured speaker for The Insight Bureau . Formerly, he was the founding editor of RealClearScience. Recent articles by this author: Is the US Doctor Shortage Intentional? How the regulator-activist-legal complex threatens American technological innovation Seattle’s Soda Tax Linked to Childhood BMI Decline, But Obesity Increased. Why? No More Tears: Vaccine Patches, Instead of Needles, Will Make Life Easier for Parents, Children Fashionable Nonsense: Clinical Trials Should Have Environmental Impact Analysis, NEJM Says All articles by this author ACSH relies on donors like you. If you enjoy our work, please contribute. Make your tax-deductible gift today! DONATE Popular articles ACSH Podcasts Podcast: Apple Cider Vinegar for Acid Reflux? No. Podcast: Future Vision—Fighting Blindness with Retinal Implants Podcast: Has Modern Life Wrecked Our Microbiome (And Our Health)? Podcast: Fiber Maxxers v Fiber Haters. Who Has Science On Their Side? Podcast: Public Health Lessons from Brazil's Alcohol Poisoning Outbreak More podcasts Latest from Josh Let's Celebrate National Bidet Day! (With Apologies to ABBA) Stupid Pennies Are Gone - Finally! SU212: A Potential Cancer Drug Missed Its Target—and Found a Better One Blue Birds Aren't Blue.  Here's How They Trick You More articles Latest from Chuck How and Why: Rethinking Scientific Explanation The Trouble With “Follow the Science” From Hype to Evidence: Rethinking Microplastic Pollution in Our Foods Counting the Dead: Media Drama Warps Reality More articles Footer Privacy Policy Contact us COPYRIGHT © 1978-2024 BY THE AMERICAN COUNCIL ON SCIENCE AND HEALTH Email: info@acsh.org Phone: 301-980-4579 The American Council on Science and Health is a research and education organization operating under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Contributions are fully tax-deductible. ACSH does not have an endowment. We raise our funds each year primarily from individuals and foundations.