The Effect of Social Media on Elections: Evidence from the United States | NBER Skip to main content NBER: National Bureau of Economic Research Subscribe Media Open Calls Search Research EXPLORE Research Findings Working Papers Books & Chapters Videos Periodicals The Digest The Reporter The Bulletin on the Economics of Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias The Bulletin on Health The Bulletin on Entrepreneurship The Bulletin on Retirement and Disability Archives The Bulletin on Aging & Health Archives Data & Business Cycles Boston Research Data Center Business Cycle Dating Public Use Data Archive All Topics Taxation Unemployment and Immigration Energy Entrepreneurship Trade Programs & Projects EXPLORE Programs & Projects Programs Economics of Aging Asset Pricing Children and Families Corporate Finance Development Economics Development of the American Economy Economic Fluctuations and Growth Economics of Education Economics of Health Environment and Energy Economics Industrial Organization International Finance and Macroeconomics International Trade and Investment Labor Studies Law and Economics Monetary Economics Political Economy Productivity, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Public Economics Working Groups Behavioral Finance Chinese Economy Economics of Crime Entrepreneurship Gender in the Economy Household Finance Innovation Policy Insurance Market Design Organizational Economics Personnel Economics Race and Stratification in the Economy Urban Economics All Projects & Centers Center for Aging and Health Research Center on Economics of Alzheimer's Disease Conference on Research in Income and Wealth Economics of Digitization Economic Measurement Research Institute Financial Frictions and Systemic Risk New Developments in Long-Term Asset Management Healthcare Decision-Making and Outcomes for People Living with Alzheimer's Disease Macroeconomics Annual Measuring the Clinical and Economic Outcomes Associated with Delivery Systems The Roybal Center for Behavior Change in Health Science of Science Funding Training Program in Aging and Health Economics Transportation Economics in the 21st Century Conferences EXPLORE Conferences Summer Institute Reimbursements Affiliated Scholars NBER News EXPLORE NBER News Research in the News Nobel Laureates Featured Working Papers Archive Career Resources EXPLORE Career Resources RA Positions – at NBER RA Positions – not at the NBER Staff Positions at NBER Calls for Fellowship Applications Current Fellowship Recipients About EXPLORE About Leadership & Governance Support & Funding History Standards of Conduct Staff Subscribe Media Open Calls Search Home Research Working Papers The Effect of Social Media on Elections… The Effect of Social Media on Elections: Evidence from the United States Thomas Fujiwara , Karsten Müller & Carlo Schwarz Share X LinkedIn Facebook Bluesky Threads Email Link Working Paper 28849 DOI 10.3386/w28849 Issue Date May 2021 We study how social media affects election outcomes in the United States. We use variation in the number of Twitter users across counties induced by early adopters at the 2007 South by Southwest (SXSW) festival, a key event in Twitter's rise to popularity. We show that this variation is unrelated to observable county characteristics and electoral outcomes before the launch of Twitter. Our results indicate that Twitter lowered the Republican vote share in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections, but had limited effects on Congress elections and previous presidential elections. Evidence from survey data, primary elections, and a text analysis of millions of tweets suggests that Twitter's relatively liberal content may have persuaded voters with moderate views to vote against Donald Trump. Acknowledgements and Disclosures We are grateful to Pablo Barbera, Levi Boxell, Matt Gentzkow, Ro’ee Levy, Alexey Makarin, Jesse Shapiro, James Snyder, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, as well as seminar participants at Princeton University, Imperial College, Warwick University, Bocconi University, University of California San Diego, OPESS, Università di Bergamo, the 2021 ASSA Conference, and the NBER Political Economy Spring 2021 Meeting for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Citation and Citation Data Copy Citation Thomas Fujiwara, Karsten Müller, and Carlo Schwarz, "The Effect of Social Media on Elections: Evidence from the United States," NBER Working Paper 28849 (2021), https://doi.org/10.3386/w28849. Copy to Clipboard Download Citation MARC RIS BibTeΧ Download Citation Data Published Versions Thomas Fujiwara & Karsten Müller & Carlo Schwarz, 2024. " The Effect of Social Media on Elections: Evidence from The United States, " Journal of the European Economic Association, vol 22(3), pages 1495-1539. citation courtesy of Related Topics Microeconomics Welfare and Collective Choice Programs Political Economy Conferences Political Economy Program Meeting, Spring 2021 More from the NBER In addition to working papers , the NBER disseminates affiliates’ latest findings through a range of free periodicals — the NBER Reporter , the NBER Digest , the Bulletin on Health , and the Bulletin on Entrepreneurship — as well as online conference reports , video lectures , and interviews . 2025, 17th Annual Feldstein Lecture, N. Gregory Mankiw," The Fiscal Future" Feldstein Lecture Presenter: N. Gregory Mankiw N. Gregory Mankiw, Robert M. Beren Professor of Economics at Harvard University, presented the 2025 Martin Feldstein... 2025, Methods Lecture, Raj Chetty and Kosuke Imai, "Uncovering Causal Mechanisms: Mediation Analysis and Surrogate Indices" Methods Lectures Presenters: Raj Chetty & Kosuke Imai SlidesBackground materials on mediationImai, Kosuke, Dustin Tingley, and Teppei Yamamoto. (2013). “Experimental Designs... 2025, International Trade and Macroeconomics, "Panel on The Future of the Global Economy" Panel Discussion Presenters: Oleg Itskhoki , Paul R. Krugman & Linda Tesar Supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation grant #G-2023-19633, the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation grant #20251294... National Bureau of Economic Research Contact Us 1050 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02138 617-868-3900 info@nber.org webaccessibility@nber.org Homepage Accessibility Policy Diversity Policy Privacy Policy Follow © 2025 National Bureau of Economic Research. All Rights Reserved.