Facts About Heroin Without the Stigma Drug Policy Alliance Issues Reduce Harms of Fentanyl Prevent Overdose Deaths Increase Access to Addiction Services Prioritize Health, End Criminal Penalties Remove Barriers to Work, Care, & Supports Regulate Drugs for Health & Safety Legalize Marijuana Right Center Health in U.S. Foreign Drug Policy Resources Resource Library Drug Facts Drug War Stats Drug War History Drug Criminalization Impacts (Map) Take Action Campaigns Become a Member Sign Up for Newsletter Give a Gift Attend Reform Conference About Wins Our Team Newsroom Financials Careers Contact Español Donate Donate Join Give Monthly Donor Advised Funds (DAFs) Other Ways to Give Menu Drug Policy Alliance Español Close Issues Reduce Harms of Fentanyl Prevent Overdose Deaths Increase Access to Addiction Services Prioritize Health, End Criminal Penalties Remove Barriers to Work, Care, & Supports Regulate Drugs for Health & Safety Legalize Marijuana Right Center Health in U.S. Foreign Drug Policy Resources Resource Library Drug Facts Drug War Stats Drug War History Drug Criminalization Impacts (Map) Take Action Campaigns Become a Member Sign Up for Newsletter Give a Gift Attend Reform Conference About Wins Our Team Newsroom Financials Careers Contact Donate Donate Join Give Monthly Donor Advised Funds (DAFs) Other Ways to Give Quick Fact Finder Back to Drug Facts 1 What is heroin and what are the effects of heroin on the body? 2 Are there any medical uses of heroin? 3 How long does heroin stay in the system? 4 What happens if you mix heroin with other drugs? 5 Can you overdose on heroin? 6 Can you become addicted to heroin after using it the first time? 7 What are treatment options for opioid use disorder? 8 What are harm reduction strategies for heroin use? 9 What are policies to help people who use heroin to stay safe? Download the Fact Sheet 6 Can you become addicted to heroin after using it the first time? No, you cannot become addicted to heroin or any drug after using it only one time. Physiological dependence is different from substance use disorder. People can develop a physiological dependence upon heroin if they use it repeatedly for several days or weeks in a row. Physiological dependence means that someone has developed an increased tolerance for a drug. They need to use more to get a desired effect. It also means they may experience physical withdrawal symptoms if they suddenly stop using a drug. Addiction and substance use disorder A person only meets the criteria for a substance use disorder if, over the course of several months, they continue to use a drug repeatedly despite experiencing numerous harms and negative consequences. Not everyone who has physiological dependence on a drug has a substance use disorder. Chronic pain patients will naturally develop physiological dependence from taking their medication. But it often allows them to function and live fulfilling lives. Methadone and buprenorphine are highly effective treatments for opioid use disorder. People who take methadone or buprenorphine for opioid use disorder can achieve recovery and meet their goals. Reviewed and updated by Jules Netherland, PhD, and Dr. Sheila P. Vakharia on 5/2/2023. Prev Fact Next Fact We're glad you're getting the real facts on heroin. Join us to learn more and help end the drug war. First Name Last Name Email (Required) Zip/Postal Code Go back to drug facts Sign up for updates from DPA. First Name Last Name Email (Required) Zip/Postal Code Careers Financials Newsroom Contact Us Become a Member Donate Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions © Copyright 2025 Drug Policy Alliance. All rights reserved. Drug Policy Alliance is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 52-1516692 Made with love by Creatives with a Conscience DEADLINE: 11:59PM, 12/2 GIVING TUESDAY 3X MATCH All gifts TRIPLED to prevent harm, promote health, save lives, and end the drug war! TRIPLE MY GIFT