Is it illegal to drive barefoot? | RAC Drive Personal Van Business Sales 0330 159 1111 myRAC Login Personal Van Business Sales 0330 159 1111 Breakdown cover Insurance Service & Repair Route planner Buying a car Shop Help & advice Sales 0330 159 1111 myRAC Login Breakdown cover Breakdown cover Insurance Insurance Service & Repair Service & Repair Route planner Route planner Buying a car Buying a car Shop Shop Help & advice Help & advice Drive Logo Drive Logo Menu News Advice & Guides Travel Car Reviews Electric Cars Live Fuel Prices News News Advice & Guides Advice & Guides Travel Travel Car Reviews Car Reviews Electric Cars Electric Cars Live Fuel Prices RAC Drive Advice & Guides Legal Driving without shoes - is it illegal? Legal Driving without shoes - is it illegal? 3 minute read | 3rd Jan 2025 There’s a great level of uncertainty surrounding whether or not it’s illegal to drive barefoot in the UK, with numerous reasons cited as to why you’re breaking the law if you do so. While these may all be valid points, none of them are technically correct. Read our road safety guide below to learn more. Is it illegal to drive without shoes? Here is the law in a nutshell: it is not illegal to drive in the UK without shoes on and the same applies for wearing flip flops. You can get behind the wheel of a vehicle barefoot or while wearing flip flops, provided you are able to operate the controls safely. If you do so with wet feet, for example, you might be putting yourself, your passengers and other road users at risk by not being able to drive the car safely. This is illegal. And while it's not illegal to drive without shoes on, that doesn’t mean it’s right. According to the Driving Standards Agency – the body that regulates the UK driving test – “suitable shoes are particularly important behind the wheel. We would not recommend driving barefoot because you don’t have the same braking force with bare feet as you do with shoes on.” How to contest a Parking Charge Notice Is it illegal to drive with snow on your car? Illegal number plates – all you need to know RAC BLACK FRIDAY SALE • Standard cover from £4.68 a month • We get to most breakdowns in 60 mins or less • Our patrols fix 4/5 breakdowns on the spot Buy now Footwear when driving There are some basic guidelines you should follow when selecting footwear to drive in. Your shoe should: Have a sole no thicker than 10mm… … but the sole should not be too thin or soft. Provide enough grip to stop your foot slipping off the pedals. Not be too heavy. Not limit ankle movement. Be narrow enough to avoid accidentally depressing two pedals at once. This does technically categorise some types of footwear – such as high-heels and flip-flops – unsuitable for piloting a car. While light, flimsy and impractical footwear can be dangerous, so can sturdy, robust shoes, such as walking or snow boots. It’s important to have a good base and grip to apply pressure to the pedals, but you need a certain degree of finesse to manipulate the controls. If not, you could strike the brake and accelerator together, producing a heart-in-mouth incident. 13 driving myths uncovered Dangerous driving - what it is and how to report it Learner driver insurance - from 2 hours to 5 months Buying a used car - the ultimate checklist Mobile phone driving laws - what is and isn't illegal? Drink-drive limits : everything you need to know If you're looking for complete peace of mind for you and your vehicle, why not purchase RAC breakdown cover today. Get coverage at home and at the roadside as standard today. Get 30 driving tips that will save you money Running a car isn’t cheap, but there are some easy things you can do to keep your costs down. Get these tips and more useful driving articles sent straight to your inbox now. Subscribe me What shoes should you not wear while driving? It is advisable to not wear flip flops, sandals or high high shoes when driving. This is because it is not safe for you or other road users and doesn't give you the best chance of reacting quickly to a potential issue on the road. You should be wearing shoes and trainers with a sole with grip and ankle support. Service, repair or MOT? You can trust the RAC with our local approved garages and mobile mechanics . Book now Back to top Legal More on this topic What does SORN mean? How to declare your vehicle as off the road Seat belt law - how to keep safe and avoid fines My car has been clamped or towed - what should I do? More on this topic You might also like 10 driving offences you didn’t know were illegal Here are 10 ways you can break the law, perhaps without being aware you’re doing so. Watch out for them and make sure you don’t commit them. 11 of the most annoying UK driving habits Middle lane hogging? Driving below the speed limit? What do you think the most annoying driving habits are? Here's our choices, let's see if you agree Middle-lane hogging - here are the facts and what the law says about it Here we take a closer look at middle lane hoggers, answering the questions: is it illegal, why do people do it and is it ever justified? What to do if you see an ambulance with its lights on Road laws still apply in the event of encountering an emergency vehicle. So what should you do? Our guide gives you all you need to know. 11 bad driving habits you should ditch right now Here at the RAC, we've taken a look at a few widely accepted driving habits to give some clear cut advice on whether they're right or wrong. Car tax bands: a complete guide to car tax Find the latest information on this year's upcoming tax bands. Read our guide containing an easy-to-follow table and how any changes can impact you. Bus lanes: who can use them and when? Bus lanes are used to separate traffic and ensure it flows freely through busy streets and are marked by dashed white lines or a solid white line. Video Channel Tunnel - car and driving video guide Allow us at the RAC to guide you through everything you need to know about taking a car through the Channel Tunnel from the south of England to northern France. Driving offences abroad – a guide to fines in Europe UK holidaymakers heading across Europe in their car should research local driving laws and rules of the road before they travel – or risk eye-watering fines! The top 10 most popular cars in the UK What are the most popular new cars in the UK? Find out with our round-up of the top 10 best selling models in Great Britain. RAC Drive profiles data from SMMT. Popular in Advice & Guides 1 Are headlights too bright? Everything you need to know about headlight glare 2 Lost driving licence – how to get a replacement 3 Car dashboard symbols and meanings – warning lights guide 4 What to do if your car breaks down 5 A complete guide to motorbike tax 6 How to check MOT history 7 MOT checklist and comprehensive guide 8 Cheapest cars to insure for new drivers 2025 - Top 10 9 Euro 7 emissions standard: what is it and when does it come into effect? 10 Driving without insurance – here are the consequences Company Information About us Careers Contact us Legal information Affiliates Press centre Complaints RAC Corporate RAC Modern Slavery Statement Products & Services Breakdown cover European breakdown cover Car insurance Home insurance Business breakdown cover Route planner myRAC RAC Rewards Student deals Sign up for our newsletter Be the first to know about new RAC products and special offers: Subscribe Follow the RAC 03 numbers are charged at national call rates and included in inclusive minute plans
from landlines and mobiles. Calls may be monitored and/or recorded. Privacy Policy Terms of use Accessibility Cookie policy Sitemap © 2025 RAC Motoring Services. All rights reserved.